The Health Code These are regulations that were formulated to allow the Department to effectively protect the health of the population. Among the rules embodied in the Health Code is Article 81 which regulates the oper ations of food establishments for the purpose of preventing public health hazards. Environmental Health Division The Division of Environmental Health is the Commission within the Health Department that is concerned with public health and works to eliminate the incidence of injury and illness caused by environmental factors. There are several Offices and Bureaus within this division. One of these is the Bureau of Food Safety and Community Sanitation that has the responsibility for con ducting inspections of food service and food processing establishments. These inspections are performed by Public Health Sanitarians. Anticorruption Warning All Sanitarians have Department of Health and Mental Hygiene badges and identification cards which they must display whenever it is
of Health and Mental Hygiene badges and identification cards which they must display whenever it is requested of them. It is illegal to offer a Sanitarian any bribe, gratuity or reward for official misconduct this is a crime that can result in fines, and or imprisonment, and the revocation of permits. Also, Sanitarians are not authorized to conduct any monetary transactions on behalf of the Department. Inspector General This is an office that exists within the Health Department with the responsibility of investigating any incidence of alleged corrupt activity. Investigations may be conducted as a result of complaints by employees of the Department or members of the public. Health Academy The Health Academy is an office within the Division of Environmental Health. One of its responsibilities is to provide training and certification courses for individuals from the public as mandated by the Health Code. The Food Protection Course is one of the courses taught here. The Food Protection
the Health Code. The Food Protection Course is one of the courses taught here. The Food Protection Course is required by the Health Code for supervisors of food service establishments and nonretail food processing establishments. These individuals must take the course and pass an examination before a certifi cate is issued to them. A person holding such a certificate must be on the premises and supervise all food preparation activities during all hours of operation. Several supervisors with this certification may be needed at an establishment to have coverage dur ing all shifts, vacations or illnesses. The Food Protection Manual has been designed to assist participants of the course to better understand the principles of safe food handling. It serves as a reference for food ser vice operators and it includes the necessary information to pass the final examination. OnLine Food Protection Course The Food Protection Course in English, Spanish and Chinese is now also available online.
Course The Food Protection Course in English, Spanish and Chinese is now also available online. This course is designed for individuals with busy schedules to study at their con venience. After the completion of the course, a final examination is scheduled at the Health Academy. Registration is done online. The link is nyc.govfoodprotectioncourse Register for Health Academy Classes OnLine You may now register and pay online for courses offered at the Department of Health and Mental Hygienes Health Academy, includ ing the Food Protection Course for restaurants. This new service allows you to avoid going to the Citywide Licensing Center to register for a course. You may also use the online service to pay for and request an appointment to replace your Food Protection Certificate. How does it work Go to the registration web page, nyc.govhealthacademy, select a course and date, pay the appropriate fee and receive confirmation. You will be asked to provide some personal information before
fee and receive confirmation. You will be asked to provide some personal information before regis tering. In most cases, you will be able to select from a list of course dates. If you dont see a date that is convenient, check back as new course dates are added frequently. 1 fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E INTRODUCTION T he New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene has the jurisdiction to regulate all matters affecting health in the city and to perform all those functions and operations that relate to the health of the people of the city. INTRODUCTION The United States has one of the safest food safety systems in the world, yet millions of Americans still get sick each year from eating contami nated foods hundreds of thousands are hospitalized and several thou sand die. This means that there is still tremendous room for improve ment in food safety standards. Most
die. This means that there is still tremendous room for improve ment in food safety standards. Most foodborne illnesses are caused by improper handling of food. The statistics from the Centers for Disease Control CDC show that some of the most common causes of foodborne illness are  Sick food worker  Poor personal HygieneBare hand contact  Improper holding temperatures  Improper cooling  Inadequate cooking and reheating  Cross contamination  Use of food from unknown source What is FoodBorne Illness Any illness that is caused by food is called foodborne illness. A food borne illness outbreak is defined as any incident involving two or more persons becoming ill with similar symptoms from the same source. Typically these illnesses are a direct result of contamination of food by harmful microorganisms, commonly called germs such as bacteria, viruses, parasites, fungi etc. Injury and illness caused by foreign objects, dangerous chemicals andor allergens in food is also considered a food
caused by foreign objects, dangerous chemicals andor allergens in food is also considered a food borne illness. Who is at Risk We are all at risk of getting a food borne illness however, the effects are more severe for certain categories of individuals  Children whose immune system human bodys defense system against diseases is not fully devel oped yet.  Elderly individuals because their immune system is not robust any more and has weakened due to old age.  Pregnant women where the threat is both to the mother and the fetus.  Individuals with com promised immune sys tems e.g., Patients with AIDS, cancer or indi viduals who are diabet ics, etc.  People on medication antibiotics, immunosup pressant, etc.. What is food Food is any edible sub stance, ice, beverage, or ingredient intended for use and used or sold for human consumption. What are Potentially Hazardous Foods PHF This expression refers to those foods that provide suitable conditions for rapid growth of microorganisms. These
refers to those foods that provide suitable conditions for rapid growth of microorganisms. These include foods that are high in protein like raw or cooked animal products such as meats, poultry, fish, shellfish mollusks as well as crustaceans, milk and milk products cheese, butter milk, heavy cream etc.,, plant protein such as tofu, and starches such as cooked rice, cooked pasta, cooked beans and cooked vegetables like potatoes, cut melons, cut leafy greens, cut tomatoes or mixtures of cut tomatoes, as well as raw seed sprouts and garlic in oil. Exceptions Those foods that have a low water activity .85 or less or those that are highly acidic with a pH of 4.6 or below. Aircooled hardboiled eggs with shells intact. 2 fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E INTRODUCTION TO FOOD SAFETY QUICK REVIEW 1. All food service establishments must have a current and valid permit issued by the NYC
REVIEW 1. All food service establishments must have a current and valid permit issued by the NYC Health Department.  TRUE  FALSE 2. Health Inspectors have the right to inspect a food service or food processing establishment as long as it is in operation. Inspectors must be given access to all areas of establishment during an inspection.  TRUE  FALSE 3. Health Inspectors are authorized to collect permit fees and fines on behalf of the Department.  TRUE  FALSE 4. Health Inspectors must show their photo identification and badge to the person in charge of an establishment.  TRUE  FALSE 5. According to the NYC Health Code, who is required to have a Food Protection Certificate . Potentially Hazardous Foods What is ReadyTo Eat Food Any food product that does not need additional heat treatment or washing is called readytoeat food. Extra care must be taken to ensure the safety of these foods. Where do we purchase foods All foods must be purchased from approved sources. These are manu facturers
do we purchase foods All foods must be purchased from approved sources. These are manu facturers and suppliers who comply with all the rules and regulations that pertain to the production of their product, including having the How do we store potentially hazardous foods All foods must be kept free from adulteration, spoilage, filth or other contamination in order to be suitable for human consumption. Potentially hazardous foods are of particular concern because they provide the conditions suitable for the growth of microorganisms. These foods must be kept either hot or cold to prevent microorganisms from growing. Hot means 140F or above and cold means 41F or below. The temperature range between 41F and 140F is known as the temperature danger zone. It is within this range that microorganisms are comfortable and will grow rapidly. At 41F and below, the temperature is cold enough to retard or slow down the growth of microorganisms, while above 140F most of the microor ganisms which cause
or slow down the growth of microorganisms, while above 140F most of the microor ganisms which cause foodborne ill ness begin to die. Thermometers The only safe way to determine that potentially hazardous foods are kept out of the temperature danger zone is by the use of thermometers. There are several different types of thermometers. The bimetallic stem is the most popular type. It is fairly inexpensive, easy to use, accurate to  or  2F and easy to recalibrate. Also, it is available within the range of 0 to 220F making it ideal for measuring the required tempera tures in a food establishment. Another thermometer in use is the thermocouple which is very accu rate but fairly expensive. Lastly, there is a thermometer called thermistor, which has a digital read out and is commonly called digital thermometer. These thermometers are used by inserting the probe into the thickest part or the geometric center of the food item being measured. The stem thermometer must remain in the food until
center of the food item being measured. The stem thermometer must remain in the food until the indicator stops moving before the reading is taken and must be re calibrated periodically to assure accuracy. Calibration Thermometers must be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. For thermo couple thermometers, follow the instructions provided by the manu facturer. For some thermistor ther mometers, placing the thermometer in 5050 solution of ice and water or boiling water, and hitting the reset button will automatically calibrate the thermometer. Bimetallic stem thermometers may be calibrated by two methods BoilingPoint Method IcePoint method BoilingPoint Method  Bring water to a boil.  Place the thermometer probe stem into the boiling water. Make sure that the thermometer probe does not touch the bottom or sides of the pan. Wait until the indicator stops moving, then record the temperature.  If the temperature is 212F, do nothing, the thermometer is accurate. This is the temperature of
If the temperature is 212F, do nothing, the thermometer is accurate. This is the temperature of boiling water at sea level.  If the temperature is not 212F, rotate the hexadjusting nut using a wrench or other tool until the indicator is at 212F. 3 fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E Bimetallic Thermometer Cold temperature reading calibration Thermocouple Thermometer necessary permits to operate. The use of foods prepared at home or in an unli censed establishment is prohibited. The Temperature Danger Zone Most microorganisms that cause foodborne illness typically grow best between temperatures of 41F and 140F. This is commonly referred to as the temperature danger zone. One of the basic and simplest ways to keep food safe is by keeping it out of the temperature danger zone. 212 165 140 41 32 0 DANGER ZONE Temperature Danger Zone IcePoint Method  Fill a container with ice and water to
41 32 0 DANGER ZONE Temperature Danger Zone IcePoint Method  Fill a container with ice and water to make a 5050 ice water slush.  Stir the slush.  Place the thermometer probe so that it is completely submerged in the icewater slush, taking care not to touch the sides or the bot tom. Wait until the indicator nee dle stops moving, then record the temperature.  If the temperature is 32F, do nothing, the thermometer is accurate. A 5050 ice water slush will always have a temperature of 32F at sealevel. If the tempear ture is not 32F, rotate the hex adjusting nut until the indicator needle is at 32F. How to use a Thermometer The following describes the proper method of using thermometers  Sanitize the probe by the use of alcohol wipes. This is a fairly safe and common practice. Other methods such as immersion in water with a temperature of 170F for 30 seconds or in a chemical sanitizing solution of 50 PPM for at least one minute, or swabbing with a chlorine sanitizing solution of 100 PPM
of 50 PPM for at least one minute, or swabbing with a chlorine sanitizing solution of 100 PPM are also acceptable.  Measure the internal product temperature by inserting the probe into the thickest part or the center of the product. It is recommend ed that the temperature readings be taken at several points.  Whenever using a bimetallic thermometer, ensure that the entire sensing portion  from the tip of the probe to the indenta tion on the stem, is inserted in to the food product.  Wait for roughly 15 seconds or until the reading is steady before recording it.  Clean and sanitize the thermometer for later use. T he first opportunity one has to ensure that food is safe is at the point of receiving. At this point care must be taken to ensure that all products come from approved sources andor reliable and rep utable suppliers. Incoming supplies must be received at a time when it is convenient to inspect them and place them into storage promptly. There are various qualities and con
to inspect them and place them into storage promptly. There are various qualities and con ditions one should look for in dif ferent food items. Beef Incoming supplies of beef can be received either fresh or frozen. Fresh beef should be at 41F or below while frozen beef should be at 0F or below. Beef should be bright to dark red in color with no objection able odor. To ensure that the supply is from an approved source, look for the United States Department of Agriculture inspection stamp. This can be found on the sides of the beef carcass or on the box when receiving portions of the carcass. This inspection is mandatory and the stamp indicates that the meat is sanitary, wholesome and fit for human consumption. Also found may be a grade stamp which attests to the quality of the meat and will certainly have an impact on its price. The inspection stamp is the more important of the two stamps. Lamb Lamb, like beef, may have an inspection stamp as well as a grade stamp. When fresh, it is
Lamb Lamb, like beef, may have an inspection stamp as well as a grade stamp. When fresh, it is light red in color and has no objectionable odor and the flesh is firm and elastic. Fresh lamb is received at 41F and frozen at or below 0F. See stamps below Pork Pork is also subject to USDA inspection. The flesh is light colored while the fat is white. A good way to check for spoilage is to insert a knife into the flesh all the way to the bone and check the blade for any off odors. See stamps below Chicken and Poultry Chicken and poultry are subject to USDA inspection which must be verified by the inspection stamp. See stamps below These must be received either fresh at 41F and below or frozen at 0F or less, as they are naturally contaminated with the microorganism Salmonella which must be kept under control. 4 fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E USDA Poultry Inspection Stamp USDA Poultry
A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E USDA Poultry Inspection Stamp USDA Poultry Grade Stamp USDA Meat Inspection Stamp USDA Meat Grade Stamp RECEIVING FOODS Fresh fish There is no inspection for fresh fish other than what can be done by sight and touch and ones sense of smell. This makes it more impor tant to purchase supplies from rep utable and reliable suppliers. Fresh fish must be received cold and on ice, 41F or less, with no objection able odor. The eyes must be clear and bulging, the gills bright red and the flesh firm and elastic. Fish that is spoiling will have a fishy odor the eyes cloudy, red rimmed and sunken the gills grey or greenish the flesh will pit on pressure and can easily be pulled away from the bones the scales are loose. Smoked fish Smoked fish provide ideal condi tions for the growth of Clostridium botulinum spores if left at room temperature. Therefore, upon receipt, all smoked fish must be stored at 38F or below. It is important to adhere
Therefore, upon receipt, all smoked fish must be stored at 38F or below. It is important to adhere to the temperature requirements stated on the label. Shellfish Shellfish is the term used to describe clams, mussels, and oysters. These belong to the family of mol lusks. They are filter feeders, that is, they absorb water from their envi ronment, filter out whatever nutri ents are there and then expel the water. Feeding in this manner causes them to absorb and accumulate harmful microorganisms from pollut ed waters. Since the whole shellfish is eaten either raw or partially cooked, it is critical to ensure that they are harvested from safe waters. It is important to buy shellfish from reputable suppliers who can provide the shippers tags which identify the source of the shellfish. These tags supply the following information  The name of the product  The name of the original shipper  The address of the original shipper  The interstate certificate number of the original shipper  The
The address of the original shipper  The interstate certificate number of the original shipper  The location of the shellfish har vesting area. When purchasing small amounts from a retailer, a tag must be pro vided. This is a splitlot tag which has all the information that is on the original tag. The shellfish tag is required to be kept together with the product, then whenever the product is used up, it must be kept for 90 days in order of delivery. The virus Hepatitis A is associated with shellfish. Check if the shellfish is alive. An opened shell may be an indication of dead shellfish. Gently tap on the shell, if the shell closes then it is alive otherwise its dead and should be discarded. Both alive as well as shucked shellfish shellfish that has been removed from its shell must only be accepted if delivered at a temperature of 41F or below. Following conditions would auto matically be grounds for rejection  Slimy, sticky or dry texture  Strong fishy odor  Broken shells Other
be grounds for rejection  Slimy, sticky or dry texture  Strong fishy odor  Broken shells Other Shellfish Lobsters, crabs and shrimps belong to the family of crustaceans. Fresh lobsters and crabs must be alive at the time of delivery. As with other seafood, a strong fishy odor is an indication of spoilage. The shell of the shrimp must be intact and firm ly attached. All processed crustacean must be delivered at 41F or below. Eggs Eggs produced outside of New York State are inspected by the U.S. Department of Agriculture while those produced within the State are inspected by the New York State Department of Agriculture and Markets. In either case, inspected eggs will be identified by a stamp on the carton. Eggs have long been 5 fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E Split Lot Tag Shellfish Tag It is strongly recommended that the invoices be kept with the tags to aid in tracing the lots
Tag It is strongly recommended that the invoices be kept with the tags to aid in tracing the lots history. associated with the microorganism Salmonella enteritidis. This bacteri um has been found on the inside of the egg, so external washing does not make eggs safe. Eggs should be bought from sup pliers who deliver them in refriger ated trucks and upon receipt, these eggs must be kept refrigerated at an ambient temperature of 45F until they are used. Pasteurized Eggs Pasteurization is a method of heating foods to destroy harmful microorganisms. Pasteurized eggs come in many forms intact shell eggs, liquid eggs, frozen eggs, or in pow dered form. Even though these have been pasteurized, they still require refrigeration to slow down growth of spoilage microorganisms to extend the shelf life. Only the powdered pasteurized eggs may be held at room temperature. Milk and Milk Products Only accept Grade A pasteurized milk and milk products. Harmful pathogens such as Listeria monocy togenes,
Grade A pasteurized milk and milk products. Harmful pathogens such as Listeria monocy togenes, E.coli 0157H7 and Salmonella spp. are commonly asso ciated with unpasteurized milk. The expiration date on pasteur ized milk and milk products must not exceed nine calendar days from date of pasteurization, while ultra pasteurized milk and milk products must not exceed 45 days from date of ultra pasteurization. Upon receipt, these products must be checked to ensure that they are well within the expiration period and that they are at 41F or below. This temperature must be main tained until the product is used up. Fresh Fruits and Vegetables The acceptable condition of fruits and vegetables vary from one item to another. As a general rule of thumb, only accept those that do not show any signs of spoilage. Reject any produce that shows signs of decay, mold, mushiness, discoloration, wilting, and bad odors. A recent study done by the center for Science in the Public Interest CSPI found that
and bad odors. A recent study done by the center for Science in the Public Interest CSPI found that contaminated fruits and vegetables are causing more food borne illness among Americans than raw chicken and eggs combined. Most fresh produce may become contaminated with Salmonella and E.coli 0157H7 due to the use of manure fertilizer more common in South and Central America, which is a major source of fresh produce to the United States. Fresh produce must be thoroughly washed prior to being served raw. This includes all kinds of fruits and vegetables including produce that has a hard rind that is typically not consumed, for example, watermelons, cantaloupes, honey dews and all varieties of melons, oranges, etc. Only potable running water should be used to thoroughly wash these produce, and the use of produce scrubbing brushes is strongly recommended. Canned Goods It is a simple task to inspect canned goods and remove from cir culation those cans that can cause foodborne illness. The
inspect canned goods and remove from cir culation those cans that can cause foodborne illness. The first step is to ensure that home canned foods are not used in a food service estab lishment. All canned foods must be commercially processed. A good can is free from rust and dents, properly sealed and labeled and slightly con cave at both ends. A can with a dent on any of the three seams top, bottom or side must be removed from circulation. The same requirement is true for severely rusted, severely dented, leak ing and cans with swollen ends. Bad cans may be rejected at delivery or seg regated and clearly labeled for return to the supplier. 6 fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E swollen severe dents slight rust critical major minor Egg Cartons Stamps Modified Atmosphere Packaged Foods Various food items are packaged under special conditions to prolong their shelf life. These conditions
food items are packaged under special conditions to prolong their shelf life. These conditions include the following  Food is placed in a package and all the air is withdrawn vacuum packaging.  Food is placed in a package, all the air is withdrawn and gases are added to preserve the contents  modified atmosphere packaging.  Food is placed in a package, all the air is withdrawn and the food is cooked in the package sous vide packaging. Because of the absence of air, foods packaged in this manner provide ideal conditions for the growth of the clostridium botulinum microorganism, unless they are refrigerated at tem peratures recommended by the manufacturer. These products must be provided by approved sources and care taken to preserve the packaging during handling and when taking the tem perature. Food establishments interested in making modified atmosphere pack aged foods must first obtain per mission from NYC DOHMH. For more information , please see Page 54. Dry Foods Dry foods such as
per mission from NYC DOHMH. For more information , please see Page 54. Dry Foods Dry foods such as grains, peas, beans, flour and sugar are to be dry at the time of receiving. Moisture will cause growth of molds and the deterioration of these products. Broken and defective packages will indicate contamination as will the evidence of rodent teeth marks. Whenever these products are removed from their original con tainers, they must be stored in tightly covered, rodentproof containers with proper labels. 7 fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E Refrigerated and Frozen Processed Foods For convenience as well as cutting down on costs, there has been a greater shift towards using prepared pre packaged refrigerated or frozen foods. These routinely include deli and luncheon meats, refrigerated or frozen entrees, etc. Care should be taken when receiving these products to ensure quality as well as
entrees, etc. Care should be taken when receiving these products to ensure quality as well as safety. Following are some guidelines  Ensure that refrigerated foods are delivered at 41F or below. Except, as noted previously, smoked fish must be received at 38 F or lower.  Ensure that frozen foods are delivered at 0F or lower.  All packaging must be intact.  Any frozen food packaging that shows signs of thawing and refreezing should be rejected. Signs include liquid or frozen liquids on the outside packaging, formation of ice crystals on the packaging or on the product, and water stains. QUICK REVIEW 1. The term potentially hazardous food refers to foods which do not support rapid growth of microorganisms.  TRUE  FALSE 2. Home canned food products are allowed in commercial food establishments.  TRUE  FALSE 3. The Temperature Danger Zone is between 41F and 140F.  TRUE  FALSE 4. Within the Temperature Danger Zone, most harmful microorganisms reproduce rapidly.  TRUE  FALSE 5. Shellfish
Temperature Danger Zone, most harmful microorganisms reproduce rapidly.  TRUE  FALSE 5. Shellfish tags must be filed in order of delivery date and kept for a period of  days. 6. Fresh shell eggs must be refrigerated at an ambient temperature of F. 7. Foods in Modified Atmosphere Packages provide ideal conditions for the growth of  8. The recommended range of bimetallic stem thermometer is  9. Meat inspected by the U.S. Dept. of Agriculture must have aan  stamp. 10. Chicken and other poultry are most likely to be contaminated with  11. Smoked fish provide ideal conditions for the growth of Botulinum spores. Therefore, this product must be stored at F 12. Safe temperatures for holding potentially hazardous foods are F or below and F or above 13. What are the four types of defective canned products that must be removed from circulation , , ,  14. Which of the following is an indication that fish is not fresh  clear eyes  fishy odor  firm flesh A fter receiving the foods proper ly, they
fish is not fresh  clear eyes  fishy odor  firm flesh A fter receiving the foods proper ly, they must be immediately moved to appropriate storage areas. The most common types of food storage include Refrigeration storage Freezer storage Dry storage Storage in Ice We will discuss each of these individually however, certain aspects are common for all types of storage and are described below. FIFO An important aspect of food stor age is to be able to use food products before their useby or expiration date. In this regard, stock rotation is very important. The common sense approach of First in First out FIFO method of stock rotation prevents waste of food products and ensures quality. The first step in implement ing the FIFO method of stock rota tion is to date products. Marking the products with a date allows food workers to know which product was received first. This way, the older stock is moved to the front, and the newly received stock is placed in the back. Storage Containers It is
is moved to the front, and the newly received stock is placed in the back. Storage Containers It is always best to store food in their original packaging however, when it is removed to another con tainer, take extra care to avoid cont amination. Only use food containers that are clean, nonabsorbent and are made from foodgrade material intended for such use. Containers made from metal may react with certain type of high acid foods such as sauerkraut, citrus juices, tomato sauce, etc. Plastic foodgrade con tainers are the best choice for these types of foods. Containers made of copper, brass, tin and galvanized metal should not be used. The use of such products is prohibited. Reusing cardboard containers to store cooked foods is also a source of contamination. Lining containers with newspapers, menus or other publication before placing foods is also prohibited as chemical dyes from these can easily leach into foods. Storage Areas Foods should only be stored in designated areas. Storing
can easily leach into foods. Storage Areas Foods should only be stored in designated areas. Storing foods in passageways, rest rooms, garbage areas, utility rooms, etc. would sub ject these to contamination. Raw foods must always be stored below and away from cooked foods to avoid cross contami nation. Refrigerated Storage This type of storage is typi cally used for holding potential ly hazardous foods as well as perishable foods for short peri ods of timea few hours to a few days. An adequate number of effi cient refrigerated units are required to store potentially hazardous cold foods. By keeping cold foods cold, the microorganisms that are found naturally on these foods are kept to a minimum. Cold temperature does not kill microor ganisms, however, it slows down their growth. Prepackaged cold foods must be stored at temperatures recommended by the manufacturer. This is especially important when dealing with vacuum packed foods, modified atmosphere packages and sous vide foods.
important when dealing with vacuum packed foods, modified atmosphere packages and sous vide foods. Smoked fish is required by the Health Code to be stored at 38F or below. Fresh meat, poultry and other potentially hazardous foods must be stored at 41F or below, while frozen foods must be stored at 0F or below. For foods to be maintained at these temperatures, refrigerators and freezers must be operating at tem peratures lower than 41F and 0F., respectively. Thermometers placed in the warmest part of a refrigerated unit are necessary to monitor the temperature of each unit. The rule of storage, First In First Out FIFO ensures that older deliveries are used up before newer ones. In practicing FIFO, the very first step would be to date all prod ucts as they are received. The next step is to store the newer products behind the older ones. The following rules are important in making sure that foods are safe during refrigerated storage  Store cooked foods above raw foods to avoid
sure that foods are safe during refrigerated storage  Store cooked foods above raw foods to avoid crosscontamina tion.  Keep cooked food items covered unless they are in the process of cooling, in which case they must be covered after being cooled to 41F.  Avoid placing large pots of hot foods in a refrigerator. This will cause the temperature of the refrigerator to rise and other foods will be out of temperature. 8 fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E STORAGE OF FOOD Cross Contamination When harmful microorganisms are transferred from one food item to another, typically, from raw foods to cooked or ready to eat foods, it is termed cross contamination. This expression also applies in any situa tion where contamination from one object crosses over to another. Cross contamination may also occur between two raw products, for instance, poultry juices falling on raw beef will contaminate it
between two raw products, for instance, poultry juices falling on raw beef will contaminate it with Salmonella, which is typically only associated with poultry and raw eggs.  Store foods away from dripping condensate , at least six inches above the floor and with enough space between items to encourage air circulation. Freezer Storage Freezing is an excellent method for prolonging the shelf life of foods. By keeping foods frozen solid, the bacterial growth is minimal at best. However, if frozen foods are thawed and then refrozen, then harmful bacteria can reproduce to dangerous levels when thawed for the second time. In addition to that, the quality of the food is also affected. Never re freeze thawed foods, instead use them immediately. Keep the following rules in mind for freezer storage  Use First In First Out method of stock rotation.  All frozen foods should be frozen solid with temperature at 0F or lower.  Always use clean containers that are clearly labeled and marked, and have
at 0F or lower.  Always use clean containers that are clearly labeled and marked, and have proper and secure lids.  Allow adequate spacing between food containers to allow for proper air circulation.  Never use the freezer for cooling hot foods.   Tip When receiving multiple items, always store the frozen foods first, then foods that are to be refrig erated, and finally the non perishable dry goods. Dry Storage Proper storage of dry foods such as cereals, flour, rice, starches, spices, canned goods, packaged foods and vegetables that do not require refrig eration ensures that these foods will still be usable when needed. Adequate storage space as well as low humidity 50 or less, and low temperatures 70 F or less are strongly recom mended. In addition to the above, avoid sunlight as it may affect the quality of some foods. Following are some of the guidelines  Use First In First Out method of stock rotation.  Keep foods at least 6 inches off the floor. This allows for proper cleaning
of stock rotation.  Keep foods at least 6 inches off the floor. This allows for proper cleaning and to detect vermin activity.  Keep foods in containers with tightly fitted lids.  Keep dry storage areas well light ed and ventilated.  Install shades on windows to pre vent exposure from sunlight.  Do not store foods under over head water lines that may drip due to leaks or condensation.  Do not store garbage in dry food storage areas.  Make sure that dry storage area is vermin proof by sealing walls and baseboards and by repairing holes and other openings.   Safety Tip Storage of harmful chemicals in the food storage areas can create hazardous situations and hence is prohibited by law. All chemi cals must be labeled properly and used in accordance to the instructions on the label. Pesticide use is prohibit ed unless used by a licensed pest con trol officer. Storage in Ice Whenever food items are to be stored in ice, care must be taken to ensure that water from the melted ice is
food items are to be stored in ice, care must be taken to ensure that water from the melted ice is constantly being drained so that the food remains on ice and not immersed in iced water. Furthermore, it is improper to store food in ice machines or ice that will be later used for human consumption.  Food should be stored at least six inches off the floor, away from walls and dripping pipes.  Keep all food, bulk or otherwise, covered and safe from contamina tion.  Check food daily and throw away any spoiled or contaminated food.  Store cleaning, disinfecting, and other chemicals away from foods, clearly marked and in their original containers.  Keep food refrigerated at a tem perature of 41F or below.  Monitor temperatures regularly with a thermometer placed in the warmest part of the refrigerator.  Keep all cooling compartments closed except when you are using them.  Store food in a refrigerator in such a way that the air inside can circulate freely.  Keep all refrigerated foods
a refrigerator in such a way that the air inside can circulate freely.  Keep all refrigerated foods covered, and use up stored leftovers quickly.  When dishes and utensils are sparkling clean, keep them that way by proper storage. Keep all cups and glasses inverted.  Cakes, doughnuts and fruit pies may be kept inside a covered dis play area.  The only goods that should be left on the counter uncovered are those which are individually wrapped and not potentially hazardous.  Do not set dirty dishes, pots, car tons or boxes on food tables.  Whenever products are removed from their original containers, store them in tightly covered, rodent proof containers with labels. 9 fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E FOOD STORAGE REVIEW Foods stored at least six inches above the floor 10 fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M
C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E Product Refrigerator Freezer Eggs Fresh, in shell 4 to 5 weeks Dont freeze Raw yolks, whites 2 to 4 days 1 year Hard cooked 1 week Dont freeze well Liquid pasteurized eggs or egg substitutes, opened 3 days Dont freeze unopened 10 days 1 year Mayonnaise, commercial Refrigerate after opening 2 months Dont freeze TV Dinners, Frozen Casseroles Keep frozen until ready to heat 3 to 4 months Deli  VacuumPacked Products Storeprepared 3 to 5 days Dont freeze well egg, chicken, tuna, ham, macaroni salads Prestuffed pork  lamb chops, chicken breasts stuffed wdressing 1 day Dont freeze well Storecooked convenience meals 3 to 4 days Dont freeze well Commercial brand vacuumpacked dinners with USDA seal, unopened 2 weeks Dont freeze well Raw Hamburger, Ground  Stew Meat Hamburger  stew meats 1 to 2 days 3 to 4 months Ground turkey, veal, pork, lamb 1 to 2 days 3 to 4 months Ham,
stew meats 1 to 2 days 3 to 4 months Ground turkey, veal, pork, lamb 1 to 2 days 3 to 4 months Ham, Corned Beef Corned beef in pouch with pickling juices 5 to 7 days Drained, 1 month Ham, canned, labeled Keep Refrigerated, unopened 6 to 9 months Dont freeze opened 3 to 5 days 1 to 2 months Ham, fully cooked, whole 7 days 1 to 2 months Ham, fully cooked, half 3 to 5 days 1 to 2 months Ham, fully cooked, slices 3 to 4 days 1 to 2 months Hot Dogs  Lunch Meats in freezer wrap Hot dogs, opened package 1 week 1 to 2 months unopened package 2 weeks 1 to 2 months Lunch meats, opened package 3 to 5 days 1 to 2 months unopened package 2 weeks 1 to 2 months Refrigerator and Freezer Storage Chart Since product dates arent a guide for safe use of a product, consult this chart and follow these tips. These short but safe time limits will help keep refrigerated food 41 F 5C from spoiling or becoming dangerous.  Purchase the product before sellby or expiration dates.  Follow handling recommendations
Purchase the product before sellby or expiration dates.  Follow handling recommendations on product.  Keep meat and poultry in its package until just before using.  If freezing meat and poultry in its original package longer than 2 months, overwrap these packages with airtight heavyduty foil, plastic wrap, or freezer paper, or place the package inside a plastic bag. Because freezing 0 F 18 C keeps food safe indefinitely, the following recommended storage times are for quality only. RECOMMENDED STORAGE OF FOOD Product Refrigerator Freezer Soups  Stews Vegetable or meatadded  mixtures of them 3 to 4 days 2 to 3 months Bacon  Sausage Bacon 7 days 1 month Sausage, raw from pork, beef, chicken or turkey 1 to 2 days 1 to 2 months Smoked breakfast links, patties 7 days 1 to 2 months Summer sausage labeled Keep Refrigerated, unopened 3 months 1 to 2 months opened 3 weeks 1 to 2 months Fresh Meat Beef, Veal, Lamb,  Pork Steaks 3 to 5 days 6 to 12 months Chops 3 to 5 days 4 to 6 months Roasts
Beef, Veal, Lamb,  Pork Steaks 3 to 5 days 6 to 12 months Chops 3 to 5 days 4 to 6 months Roasts 3 to 5 days 4 to 12 months Variety meats tongue, kidneys, liver, heart, chitterlings 1 to 2 days 3 to 4 months Meat Leftovers Cooked meat  meat dishes 3 to 4 days 2 to 3 months Gravy  meat broth 1 to 2 days 2 to 3 months Fresh Poultry Chicken or turkey, whole 1 to 2 days 1 year Chicken or turkey, parts 1 to 2 days 9 months Giblets 1 to 2 days 3 to 4 months Cooked Poultry, Leftover Fried chicken 3 to 4 days 4 months Cooked poultry dishes 3 to 4 days 4 to 6 months Pieces, plain 3 to 4 days 4 months Pieces covered with broth, gravy 1 to 2 days 6 months Chicken nuggets, patties 1 to 2 days 1 to 3 months Fish  Shellfish Lean fish 1 to 2 days 6 months Fatty fish 1 to 2 days 2 to 3 months Cooked fish 3 to 4 days 4 to 6 months Smoked fish 14 days 2 months Fresh shrimp, scallops, crawfish, squid 1 to 2 days 3 to 6 months Canned seafood after opening out of can Pantry, 5 years 3 to 4 days 2 months
2 days 3 to 6 months Canned seafood after opening out of can Pantry, 5 years 3 to 4 days 2 months 11 N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E F ood borne illnesses are caused by the presence of foreign objects, chemicals and living organ isms in our foods. These can be described as hazards to our health. Physical Hazards The presence of a foreign object in food that can cause an injury or an illness is called a Physical Hazard. The common cause of a physical hazard is accidental andor due to improper food handling practices by food workers. Food workers must be trained to handle foods safely so as not to contaminate foods. Food workers should not wear jewelry or any other personal effects that may accidentally fall into food items. Some common examples include  Tiny pebbles that are sometimes found in rice, beans, and peas.  Fragments of glassfrom a bro ken glass, from scooping ice with the glass, from broken light bulb without protective
a bro ken glass, from scooping ice with the glass, from broken light bulb without protective shields, etc.  Short, unfrilled toothpicks used to hold a sandwich together.  Bandages  Metal shavings from a worn can opener  Scouring pad steel wool wire  Pieces of jewelry Any food item with a physical hazard must be discarded immediately. Chemical hazards A chemical hazard may be in a food item either accidentally, delib erately or naturally. A chemical may be introduced to a food accidentally by the careless use of insecticides, storing of clean ing and other chemicals next to open foods and the storage of acidic foods in metal containers. These are the more common examples and may be avoided by  Using an experienced, licenced exterminator.  Storing cleaning and other chemi cals, including personal medica tion, away from foods, preferably in a locked cabinet.  Storing acidic foods in containers made of foodgrade plastic. A chemical may be introduced into a food item deliberately to
containers made of foodgrade plastic. A chemical may be introduced into a food item deliberately to enhance its taste or appearance without realizing that it may cause consumers to become ill. Sulfites are used to maintain the color and freshness of cut fruits and vegetables. Monosodium Glutamate MSG is used to enhance the flavor of foods. Excessive use of sulfites and MSG have both resulted in serious allergic reaction among sensitive individuals. MSG is permitted in a food service establishment as long as it is dis closed on the menu, however, the use of sulfites is prohibited. Certain foods may contain sulfites when they are brought in but none may be added in a food service establishment. Toxic metals Utensils made from lead, copper, brass, zinc, antimony and cadmium are not permitted for use with food products. These can cause toxic metal poisoning from the leaching of these chemicals into the food. Similarly, containers previously designed to hold cleaning agents and other
into the food. Similarly, containers previously designed to hold cleaning agents and other chemicals should never be used for food storage. Always ensure that food storage containers are made from foodgrade materials. Biological Hazards Biological hazards occur when diseasecausing microorganisms such as Bacteria, Viruses, Parasites and Fungi end up contaminating our food supply. In addition to that, toxins found naturally in certain foods can also cause food borne illness. Mushrooms are both poisonous and nonpoisonous and they are dif ficult to tell apart. To be certain that a safe variety is being used, they must be purchased from a reli able commercial source. Toxins in certain fish can also be a serious problem. Some fish have natural toxins, others accumulate toxins from their food, while yet QUICK REVIEW 1. The acronym FIFO means  2. The first step in implementing FIFO is to rotate the stock.  TRUE  FALSE 3. The New York City Health code requires that all food items must be
the stock.  TRUE  FALSE 3. The New York City Health code requires that all food items must be stored at least  off the floor. 4. In order to prevent crosscontamination, raw foods in a refrigerator must be stored  cooked foods. 5. Cold temperatures slow down the growth of microorganisms.  TRUE  FALSE 6. Food for storage must be kept covered andor stored in verminproof containers.  TRUE  FALSE 7. Ice intended for human consumption can be used for storing cans and bottles.  TRUE  FALSE 8. When foods are stored directly in ice, the water from that ice must be drained constantly.  TRUE  FALSE HAZARDS TO OUR HEALTH fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L FOOD ALLERGIES 12 fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E A n allergy is a reaction to a food or ingredient that the body mistakenly believes to be harmful. Millions of Americans suffer from allergic reactions to food each year.
believes to be harmful. Millions of Americans suffer from allergic reactions to food each year. Most of these food allergies are mild in nature, but some food allergies can cause severe reactions, and may even be lifethreatening. There is no cure for food allergies. Avoidance of food allergens and early recognition and management of allergic food reactions are crucial to prevent serious health conse quences. Common Symptoms Following are some of the com mon symptoms Mild  Itching  Wheezing  Hives  Swelling of face and eyes Severe  Loss of consciousness due to air way obstruction  Death Eight Most Common Allergens Although an individual could be allergic to any food product, such as fruits, vegetables, and meats, however, the following eight foods account for 90 of all foodallergic reactions  Fish  Peanuts  Wheat  Soy  Tree Nuts  Eggs  Milk  Shell Fish Heres an easy way to remember them Food Problems Will Send The EMS These eight foods as well as any food that contains proteins from
Food Problems Will Send The EMS These eight foods as well as any food that contains proteins from one or more of these foods are called major food allergens by law. Additives that Trigger Allergies In addition to the foods listed above, some common additives of foods can also trigger an allergic reaction. Full disclosure of these on the menu is necessary. Following are some of the common food additives used in the food industry  Nitritesadded in meats for redness.  Sulfitesadded to dried and preserved fruits and vegetables for freshness.  MSG  added to enhance the flavor of food.  The use of Nitrites and Sulfites in the retail food industry is not permitted. Hidden Ingredients Sometimes a dish may contain a very insignificant amount of common allergens and only the chef may be aware of it. Never guess Always ensure that a dish is 100 free of allergens. Review the ingredients list for every dish requested by the customers and check labels on packaged and ready toeat food products.
every dish requested by the customers and check labels on packaged and ready toeat food products. Customer Safety In order to protect the customers, it is important that there is full dis closure of the use of these eight common allergens to the customers. This can be done in the following manner  By describing details of menu items.  When uncertain about any ingredient, inform the customer immediately.  Ensure that food has no contact with ingredients to which customer is allergic. Even the smallest amount of allergen can cause a serious reaction.  Wash hands thoroughly and use new sanitary gloves before others develop toxins during stor age. Puffer fish may contain tetrodotoxin andor saxitoxin which can cause severe illness and death. These are central nervous system toxins and according to FDA, are 1,200 times more deadly than cyanide. Certain predatory fish, such as the barracuda, feed on smaller fish that had been feeding on algae. Algae, during certain seasons and in certain
feed on smaller fish that had been feeding on algae. Algae, during certain seasons and in certain waters may be toxic. This toxicity accumulates in the smaller fish and then in the fish that eat the smaller fish. In this manner the ciguatoxin, which is not destroyed by cooking, may accumulate in fish and this leads to the illness Ciguatera. Scombroid poisoning is a food borne illness caused by the con sumption of marine fish from the Scombridae family tuna, mackerel, and a few nonScombroidae relatives, such as bluefish, dolphin and amberjacks. These fish have high levels of histidine in their flesh and during decomposition, the histidine is converted into histamine which causes consumers to suffer an aller giclike reaction. The symptoms of this illness, among other things, mimic a heart attack. Histamine is not destroyed by cooking. 13 fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E preparing
A L N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E preparing dishes for guests with food allergy.  Clean and sanitize all equipment, cooking and eating utensils, and food contact surfaces with hot soapy water before preparing allergenfree foods.  Never use any equipment or utensils previously used to cook other foods.  Never cook with oils that were used to prepare other foods. Heat does not destroy allergens.  Look out for splashes and acci dental spills. It is important to remember that removing allergens from a finished dish, such as nuts, shellfish etc, does not make the dish safe. If a guest has an allergic reaction, call 911 immediately. To prevent future mistakes, find out what went wrong. I n order to understand the reasons behind food sanitation practices, it is necessary to know a few facts about the microorganisms which cause food spoilage and foodborne disease. Bacteria Bacteria, commonly called germs, are extremely small, plantlike
and foodborne disease. Bacteria Bacteria, commonly called germs, are extremely small, plantlike organisms which must be viewed through a microscope in order to be seen. If 25,000 bacteria are placed in a line, that line would only be one inch long one million could fit on the head of a pin. Like any living thing, bacteria require food, moisture and the proper temperature for growth. Most of them need air these are called aerobes, but some can survive only in the absence of air these are called anaerobes and some can grow with or without air these are called facultative. Bacteria are found everywhere on the earth, in the air and in water. Soil abounds with bacteria which grow on dead organic matter. Shapes of Bacteria One method of classifying bacteria is by their shape. All bacteria can be assigned to one of the following cat egories  Cocci are round or spherical in shape. While they are able to live alone, they often exist in groups. Single chains are called streptococci. Those which
able to live alone, they often exist in groups. Single chains are called streptococci. Those which form a grapelike cluster are called staphylococci while those that exist in pairs are called diplococci.  Bacilli are rod shaped. Some of these also congregate in the single chain form and are called strepto bacilli.  Spirilla are spiral or comma shaped. Spores Some bacteria are able to protect themselves under adverse conditions by forming a protective shell or wall around themselves in this form they are in the nonvegetative stage and are called spores. These bacterial spores can be likened to the seeds of a plant which are also resistant to adverse conditions. During the spore stage bacteria do not reproduce or multiply. As soon as these spores find themselves under proper conditions of warmth, moisture and air requirement, they resume their normal vegetative stage and their growth . Since spores are designed to withstand rigorous con ditions, they are difficult to destroy by normal
spores are designed to withstand rigorous con ditions, they are difficult to destroy by normal methods. Much higher killing temperatures and longer time periods are required. Fortunately, MICROBIOLOGY OF FOODS  BACTERIA QUICK REVIEW The presence of the following in food constitutes a physical hazard 1. Pieces of glass  TRUE  FALSE 2. Metal shavings  TRUE  FALSE 3. Piece of wood  TRUE  FALSE 4. Pebbles and stones  TRUE  FALSE 5. MSG  TRUE  FALSE 6. Toothpick  TRUE  FALSE The presence of the following in the food constitutes a chemical hazard 7. Ciguatoxin  TRUE  FALSE 8. Prescription medicines  TRUE  FALSE 9. Roach spray  TRUE  FALSE 10. Hair  TRUE  FALSE 11. False fingernails  TRUE  FALSE 12. Hair dye  TRUE  FALSE 13. Sulfites can be used in food preparation as long as their use is disclosed on the menu.  TRUE  FALSE 14. Some wild mushrooms can be very toxic therefore mushrooms must always be purchased from a reliable and trustworthy commercial source.  TRUE  FALSE 15. Use of MSG
always be purchased from a reliable and trustworthy commercial source.  TRUE  FALSE 15. Use of MSG  Monsodium Glutamate in foods is a very dangerous practice and is not allowed under any circumstances.  TRUE  FALSE 14 fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E there are only a relatively few path ogenic or disease causing bacteria which are sporeformers. Tetanus, anthrax and botulism are diseases caused by sporeformers. Bacterial Reproduction Bacteria reproduce by splitting in two this is called binary fission. For this reason, their numbers are always doubling one bacterium generates two each of these generates another two resulting in a total of four and the four become eight and this goes on and on. The time it takes for bacteria to double generation time is roughly twenty to thirty minutes under favorable conditions. Types of Bacteria According to Their Effect on Humans Types of bacteria
under favorable conditions. Types of Bacteria According to Their Effect on Humans Types of bacteria classified according to their effect on us are  Harmful or diseasecausing bac teria are known as pathogenic bacteria or pathogens. They cause various diseases in humans, animals and plants.  Undesirable bacteria which cause decomposition of food are often referred to as spoilage bacteria.  Beneficial bacteria are used in the production of various foods including cultured milk, yogurt, cheese and sauerkraut.  Benign bacteria, as far as we know at the present time, are neither helpful nor harmful to humans. Of the hundreds of thousands of strains of bacteria, most fall in this category. It must be realized that many bacteria are essential in the bal ance of nature thus the destruc tion of all bacteria in the world would be catastrophic. Our main objective is public health protec tion through the control and destruction of pathogenic disease causing bacteria and those that cause food
the control and destruction of pathogenic disease causing bacteria and those that cause food spoilage. Bacterial Growth Bacteria require certain conditions in order to multiply. They need moisture, warmth, nutrients and time. It is rapid bacterial multiplication that often causes problems with regard to the safety of a food prod uct. Under ideal conditions rapid growth can mean that one organism can become two in as little as 2030 minutes. The Bacterial Growth Curve table assumes that a certain food initially contains 1,000 organisms. The ideal rapid growth takes place during the log phase and all bacteria will reach this rapid part of their growth if given the correct conditions. Bacteria begin their growth cycle by adjusting to any new environment or condition by being in a resting or lag phase. Stationary and death phases are usually brought about by the depletion of available nutrients and the produc tion of their waste. Conditions Necessary for the Growth of Bacteria FATTOM
and the produc tion of their waste. Conditions Necessary for the Growth of Bacteria FATTOM   FoodBacteria require food for growth. The foods that they like the most are the same ones we do. These are generally high protein foods of animal origin, such as meat, poultry, fish, shellfish, eggs, milk and milk products. They also love plant products that are heat treated, such as cooked potato, cooked rice, tofu, and soy protein foods.  AcidityBacteria generally prefer neutral foods. They do not fare well in foods that are too acidic or too alkaline. This is why vine gar is used as a preservative. Acidity is measured in pH. Any food with a pH value of 4.6 or less is considered too acidic for bacteria to grow, therefore, these foods are relatively safer. 100 10 100 1,000 10,000 100,000 1,000,000 1,000,E07 300 500 700 900 1100 100 300 500 Lag pm am Log Death Stationary l Growth Phases Bacterial Growth Curve Growth of Bacteria Number of Time Organisms 30 minutes later 2,000 1 hour later 4,000
Growth Curve Growth of Bacteria Number of Time Organisms 30 minutes later 2,000 1 hour later 4,000 112 hours later 8,000 2 hours later 16,000 212 hours later 32,000 3 hours later 64,000 312 hours later 128,000 4 hours later 256,000 pH Values of Some Popular Foods Approximate Product pH range Ground beef 5.1 to 6.2 Ham 5.9 to 6.1 Fish most species 6.6 to 6.8 Clams 6.5 Oysters 4.8 to 6.3 Crabs 7.0 Butter 6.1 to 6.4 Buttermilk 4.5 Cheese 4.9 to 5.9 Milk 6.3 to 7.0 Yogurt 3.8 to 4.2 Vegetables 3.1 to 6.5 Fruits 1.8 to 6.7 Orange juice 3.6 to 4.3 Melons 6.3 to 6.7 Mayonnaise 3.0 to 4.1 commercial  TemperatureIn general, bacteria prefer warm temperatures. Those that prefer our food grow between 41140F Temperature Danger Zone. This temperature range includes normal body tem perature and usual room tempera ture. However, different types of bacteria prefer different tempera tures. Mesophilic Bacteria grow best at temperatures between 50110F. Most bacteria are in this group. Thermophilic
Bacteria grow best at temperatures between 50110F. Most bacteria are in this group. Thermophilic Bacteria prefer heat and grow best at temperatures between 110150F or more. Psychrophilic Bacteria prefer cold and grow at temperatures below 50F. One way to control the growth of bacteria is to ensure that they are not within the Temperature Danger Zone See Page 2.  Time Bacteria require time to grow and multiply. When condi tions are favorable, one bacterium will split and become two every twenty to thirty minutes. Thus, the more time they have, the more bacteria will be produced. The simplest way of controlling bacte ria is to minimize the time foods stay in the temperature danger zone.  OxygenSome bacteria need oxygen from the air in order to grow these are called aerobes. Others prefer it when there is no air or oxygen these are called anaerobes. There are yet others that will thrive whether oxygen is present or not these are called facultative aerobes or facultative anaerobes.
whether oxygen is present or not these are called facultative aerobes or facultative anaerobes.  MoistureBacteria need mois ture or water in order to survive. Food is absorbed in a liquid form through the cell wall. If moisture is not present in sufficient quantity, bacteria will eventually die. Bacteria can be controlled by removing moisture from foods by the processes of dehydration, freezing and preserving in salt or sugar. The amount of moisture in a food is measured by Water Activity value. Any food with a Water Activity value of .85 or less does not have enough moisture to support the active growth of bacteria. Locomotion Bacteria cannot crawl, fly or move about. A few types do have threadlike appendages called flagella with which they can propel themselves to a very lim ited extent. Therefore they must be carried from place to place by some vehicle or through some channel. The modes of transmission include air, water, food, hands, coughing, sneezing, insects, rodents, dirty
modes of transmission include air, water, food, hands, coughing, sneezing, insects, rodents, dirty equipment, unsafe plumbing connections and unclean utensils. Hands are one of the most danger ous vehicles. There is no doubt that that if food workers would take bet ter care of their hands then the inci dence of foodborne disease would be reduced greatly. Destruction by Heat The most reliable and timetested method of destroying bacteria is the use of heat. This method is most effective when both time and tem perature factors are applied. In other words, not only do we have to reach the desired temperature to destroy bacteria, but we must allow sufficient time to permit the heat to kill the more sturdy ones. The lower the temperature of the heat applied, the longer the time required to kill bacteria conversely, the higher the temperature, the less time is neces sary. An example of this principle involves the two accepted methods for pasteurizing milk. In the hold ing method, milk is
principle involves the two accepted methods for pasteurizing milk. In the hold ing method, milk is held at a tem perature of 145F for thirty minutes while in the flash or high tem perature short time method, milk is held at 161F for fifteen seconds. Destructon by Chemicals Bacteria can be destroyed by chemical agents. Chemicals that kill bacteria are called germicides or bactericides. Examples are carbolic acid, formaldehyde, iodine, chlorine and quaternary compounds. The effectiveness of a bactericide depends on the concentration used. When used to kill pathogenic dis easecausing organisms, it is called a sanitizer. The most popular sani tizer used in the food industry is chlorine. Other Methods of Destruction When exposed to air and sun light, bacteria are destroyed due to the combined effects of the lack of moisture and exposure to the ultra violet rays of the sun. 15 fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E
T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E Water Activity of Some Popular Foods Water Food Activity Fresh fruits .97 to 1.0 Pudding .97 to .99 Bread .96 to .97 Cheese .95 to 1.0 Fresh meat .95 to 1.0 Cakes .90 to .94 Cured meat .87 to .95 Jam .75 to .80 Honey .54 to .75 Dried fruit .55 to .80 Chocolate candy .55 to .80 Caramels .60 to .65 Dried milk .20 Dried vegetables .20 Crackers .10 16 fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E Viruses Viruses are minute organic forms which seem to be intermediate between living cells and organic compounds. They are smaller than bacteria, and are sometimes called filterable viruses because they are so small that they can pass through the tiny pores of a porcelain filter which retain bacteria. They cannot be seen through a microscope magnifica tion of 1500x, but can be seen
retain bacteria. They cannot be seen through a microscope magnifica tion of 1500x, but can be seen through an electron microscope magnification of 1,000,000x. Viruses cause poliomyelitis, small pox, measles, mumps, encephalitis, influenza, and the common cold. Viruses, like bacteria, are presumed to exist everywhere. Unlike bacteria, viruses cannot reproduce in the food. Food only serves as a reservoir and a trans porting mechanism until it is ingested. Once viruses invade our body, they use our cells to duplicate themselves. Most often, the presence of viruses in food supply is an indi cation of contamination through human feces. Food workers poor personal hygiene  for instance, not washing hands thoroughly after using the toilet, is a major cause of these viral infections. The two most common types of viruses in the food industry are Hepatitis A, and Noroviruses previously known as Norwalk Virus. Noroviruses have been recently implicated in various food borne illness outbreaks
as Norwalk Virus. Noroviruses have been recently implicated in various food borne illness outbreaks involv ing cruise ships. Noroviruses are highly contagious and can spread very quickly. Hepatitis A virus can be fatal as it affects the liver. Parasites Parasites are organisms that live in or on other organisms without benefiting the host organisms. Parasites are not capable of living independent ly. The two most common parasites that affect the food industry include trichinella spiralis, which is common ly associated with pork, and the round Anisakid worm that is associ ated with many species of fish. With the growing interest in eating raw marinated fish such as sushi, sashi mi, ceviche etc., there is an increased risk of illnesses such as Anisakiasis. Yeasts Yeasts are onecelled organisms which are larger than bacteria. They, too, are found everywhere, and require food, moisture, warmth, and air for proper growth. Unlike some bacteria which live with out air, yeasts must have air
and air for proper growth. Unlike some bacteria which live with out air, yeasts must have air in order to grow. They need sugar, but have the ability to change starch into sugar. When yeasts act on sugar, the for mation of alcohol and carbon diox ide results. In the baking industry, yeast is used to raise dough through the production of carbon dioxide. The alcohol is driven off by the heat of the oven. In wine pro duction, the carbon dioxide gas bub bles off, leaving the alcohol. The amount of alcohol produced by yeasts is limited to 18, because yeasts are killed at this concentra tion of alcohol. Yeasts reproduce by budding, which is similar to binary fission. Generally, the methods described for destruction of bacteria will kill yeasts as well. Yeasts are not generally consid ered to be pathogenic or harmful, although a few of them do cause skin infections. Wild yeasts, or those that get into a food by accident rather than by design of the food processor, cause food spoilage and
get into a food by accident rather than by design of the food processor, cause food spoilage and decomposition of starch and sugar, and therefore are undesirable. Molds Molds are multicellular many celled microscopic plants which become visible to the naked eye when growing in sufficient quantity. Mold colonies have definite colors white, black, green, etc.. They are larger than bacteria or yeasts. Some molds are pathogenic, causing such diseases as athletes foot, ringworm, and other skin diseases. However, moldy foods usually do not cause illness. In fact, molds are encouraged to grow in certain cheeses to pro duce a characteristic flavor. The structure of the mold con sists of a rootlike structure called the mycelium, a stem aerial filament called the hypha, and the spore sac, called the sporangium. All molds reproduce by means of spores. Molds are the lowest form of life that have these specialized reproductive cells. Molds require moisture and air for growth and can grow on almost
specialized reproductive cells. Molds require moisture and air for growth and can grow on almost any organic matter, which does not necessarily have to be food. Molds do not require warmth, and grow Refrigeration Refrigeration of foods does not destroy the bacteria already present. Cold temperatures from 0F to 41F will inhibit or slow the growth of bacteria. Thus, a food item will still be safe after several days in a refrigerator but not indefinitely. Freezing foods at or below 0F will further slow or even stop the growth of bacteria but will not kill them. MICROBIOLOGY OF FOODS  OTHER MICROORGANISMS 17 fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E very well in refrigerators. Neither do molds require much moisture, although the more moisture present, the better they multiply. Methods of destruction for molds are similar to those required for bac teria. Heat, chemicals, and ultravio let rays
for molds are similar to those required for bac teria. Heat, chemicals, and ultravio let rays destroy mold spores as well as the molds. Refrigeration does not necessarily retard their growth. Certain chemicals act as mold inhibitors. Calcium propionate Mycoban is one used in making bread. This chemical when used in the dough, retards the germination of mold spores, and bread so treated will remain moldfree for about five days. One of the most beneficial molds is the Penicillium mold from which penicillin, an antibiotic, is extracted. The discovery, by Dr. Alexander Fleming, of the molds antibiotic properties opened up a whole field of research, and other antibiotic products from molds have been discovered. T here are three categories of foodborne illnesses infection, intoxication and toxin mediated infection. Foodborne Infection This is an illness that is caused by eating a food that has large numbers of microorganisms on it. These micro organisms enter the human digestive tract and
large numbers of microorganisms on it. These micro organisms enter the human digestive tract and disrupt the functions of the intestines resulting in diarrhea and other problems. The severity of the problem depends on the dosage ingested and the particular bacterium. The first symptoms of an infection will occur from as early as six hours to as long as forty eight hours after the contaminated food is eaten. Foodborne Intoxication This is an illness that is caused by eating a food that has the toxins that are generated by certain micro organisms. The longer a microorgan ism is on a food, the more time it has to multiply and produce its waste products. These waste products are toxins and result in an intoxication when that food is eaten. It is important to note that an intoxication will cause nausea and vomiting, either immediately after the food is eaten or within the first six hours. Also, toxins are not destroyed by heat so once they are formed no amount of cooking after wards will
toxins are not destroyed by heat so once they are formed no amount of cooking after wards will inactivate them. Foodborne Toxin Mediated Infection This illness occurs when one ingests a food that has microorganisms on it. These micro organisms find favorable conditions to grow in the intestines and produce their toxins which will then cause a foodborne illness. FOODBORNE ILLNESSES QUICK REVIEW 1. Foods that have been contaminated with pathogenic bacteria  will  will not change in taste and smell. 2. Under favorable conditions bacteria can double their population every 20 to 30 minutes.  TRUE  FALSE 3. At what temperature is rapid growth of pathogenic bacteria possible  65F  140F 4. What are the six factors that affect the growth of bacteria, , , , , . 5. Which of the following foods may encourage rapid growth of bacteria Cooked riceHard boiled air cooled shell egg 6. What type of bacteria grows best at temperatures between 50110F  7. What is the water activity level at which bacteria
grows best at temperatures between 50110F  7. What is the water activity level at which bacteria have difficulty reproducing  8. In the life cycle of bacteria, during which phase do bacteria grow most quickly  9. Most viral foodborne diseases are the result of poor personal hygiene.  TRUE  FALSE 10. The foodborne parasite typically found in undercooked pork is  11. A foodborne parasite typically found in marine fish is  12. The most popular chemical sanitizer is  13. Food held under refrigeration must be at or below F 14. The reason for refrigerating potentially hazardous foods is to  18 fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E ILLNESS Salmonellosis BACTERIA Salmonella enteritidis SOURCE Animals, poultry, eggs, and humans FOODS INVOLVED Chicken, other poultry, eggs ONSET TIME 648 hours TYPE OF ILLNESS Infection SYMPTOMS Abdominal pain, diarrhea, chills, fever, nausea, vomiting, and malaise
ILLNESS Infection SYMPTOMS Abdominal pain, diarrhea, chills, fever, nausea, vomiting, and malaise CONTROL MEASURES  Cook chicken, poultry and stuffing to 165F for at least 15 seconds.  Refrigerate raw chicken, poultry, and other meats to 41F or lower.  Pay close attention to eggs store eggs in a refrigera tor at 45F or lower. Cook eggs to 145F or higher, or per customer request, break and cook eggs to order, and use pasteurized eggs instead of raw eggs if a food is not going to be cooked to at least 145F.  Prevent cross contamination. ILLNESS Staphylococcal gastroenteritis BACTERIA Staphylococcus aureus SOURCE Healthy human beings in nose, throat, hair, on infected cuts, bruises, abscesses and acne. FOODS INVOLVED Baked goods, custards, pastry, and cooked foods traditionally left out at room temperature ham, sliced meats and other foods with low water activity ONSET TIME 648 hours TYPE OF ILLNESS Infection SYMPTOMS Abdominal pain, diarrhea, chills, fever, nausea, vomiting, and malaise
ILLNESS Infection SYMPTOMS Abdominal pain, diarrhea, chills, fever, nausea, vomiting, and malaise CONTROL MEASURES  Prevent bare hand contact with readytoeat foods.  Practice good personal hygiene.  Prevent infected food workers from working. Look out for any worker that has an infected cut or wound on the hands or skin.  Keep all foods at 41F or below cool foods rapidly. ILLNESS Campylobacteriosis BACTERIA Campylobacter jejuni SOURCE Poultry, pigs, sheep and cattle FOODS INVOLVED Chicken, other poultry, beef, liver and water ONSET TIME 210 days TYPE OF ILLNESS Infection SYMPTOMS Diarrhea oftentimes bloody, severe abdominal pain, fever, anorexia, malaise, headache and vomiting. CONTROL MEASURES  Proper sanitization of equipment in order to pre vent cross contamination.  Thoroughly cook meat, poultry and poultry products.  Use only pasteurized milk.  Use potable water. ILLNESS Listeriosis BACTERIA Listeria monocytogenes SOURCE Soil, infected animals or humans, and water FOODS INVOLVED
BACTERIA Listeria monocytogenes SOURCE Soil, infected animals or humans, and water FOODS INVOLVED Unpateurized milk, raw vegetables, poultry, raw meats, cheese ONSET TIME 1 day3 weeks TYPE OF ILLNESS Infection SYMPTOMS Low grade fever, flulike symptoms, stillbirths, meningitis and encephalitis.  Fatalities may occur CONTROL MEASURES  Cook foods thoroughly and to required minimum temperatures.  Use only pasteurized milk and dairy products.  Thoroughly wash raw vegetables before eating.  Avoid cross contamination.  Clean and sanitize all surfaces. ILLNESS Shigellosis BACTERIA Shigella species SOURCE Human FOODS INVOLVED Raw produce, moist prepared foods tuna, macaroni, potato salads, etc. ONSET TIME 17 days TYPE OF ILLNESS Infection SYMPTOMS Abdominal pain, diarrhea bloody stools and fever. CONTROL MEASURES  Practice good personal hygiene with special emphasis on hand washing, especially after using the toilet.  Avoid bare hands contact with readytoeat foods.  Rapidly cool foods to 41F
after using the toilet.  Avoid bare hands contact with readytoeat foods.  Rapidly cool foods to 41F or below.  Avoid cross contamination.  Eliminate flies from the facility.  Clean and sanitize all surfaces. COMMON FOODBORNE ILLNESSES 19 fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E ILLNESS Botulism BACTERIA Clostridium botulinum SOURCE Soil, water, intestinal tract of animals and fish FOODS INVOLVED Homecanned foods, smoked and vacuum packaged fish, garlic in oil, baked potatoes, and thick stews ONSET TIME 1236 hours TYPE OF ILLNESS Intoxication SYMPTOMS Gastrointestinal symptoms may pre cede neurological symptoms vertigo, blurred or double vision, dryness of mouth, difficulty swallowing, speak ing and breathing, muscular weak ness and respiratory paralysis. This illness may cause fatalities. CONTROL MEASURES  Never use homecanned or homejarred products.  Store smoked fish at 38F or below.
CONTROL MEASURES  Never use homecanned or homejarred products.  Store smoked fish at 38F or below. Store all vacuum packaged foods according to manufacturers rec ommended instructions time and temperatures.  Keep commercially prepared garlic and other herbs in oil refrigerated at all times.  Avoid cross contamination. ILLNESS Scombroid poisoning BACTERIA Bacteria that help produce histamine SOURCE Tuna, bluefish, mackerel, bonito, and mahi mahi FOODS INVOLVED Cooked or raw tuna, bluefish, mack erel, bonito, and mahi mahi ONSET TIME Minutes2 hours TYPE OF ILLNESS Intoxication SYMPTOMS Headache, dizziness, nausea, vomiting, peppery taste, burning sensation in the throat, facial swelling and stomach aches. CONTROL MEASURES  Use a reputable supplier.  Refuse fish that have been thawed and refrozen. Signs that fish have been refrozen include dried or dehydrated appearance excessive frost or ice crystals in the package or white blotches freezer burns.  Check temperatures. Fresh fish must be
crystals in the package or white blotches freezer burns.  Check temperatures. Fresh fish must be between 32F and 41F.  Thaw frozen fish at refrigeration temperature of 41F or below. ILLNESS Hemorrhagic colitis BACTERIA Shiga toxin producing escherichia coli such as e.coli 0157h7 SOURCE Cattle, humans, unpasteurized milk, untreated water FOODS INVOLVED Raw and undercooked ground meats, fresh produce, unpasteurized milk and untreated water ONSET TIME 1272 hours TYPE OF ILLNESS Intoxication as well as infection SYMPTOMS Diarrhea often bloody, severe abdominal pain nausea, vomiting, chills. In children it may complicate into hemolytic uremic syndrome hus, responsible for kidney failure and blood poisoning. CONTROL MEASURES  Cook ground beef and all ground meats to 158F or higher.  Cook all foods to required minimum cooking temperatures.  Use pasteurized milk.  Reheat all foods to 165F within 2 hours.  Avoid cross contamination.  Practice good personal hygiene. Wash hands thor oughly after
2 hours.  Avoid cross contamination.  Practice good personal hygiene. Wash hands thor oughly after touching raw foods or after any activity that may have contaminated them. ILLNESS Clostridium perfringens enteritis BACTERIA Clostridium perfringens SOURCE Soil, water, gastrointestinal tract of healthy humans and animals cattle, poultry, pigs, and fish FOODS INVOLVED Meat, stews, chilli, gravies, poultry, beans ONSET TIME 822 hours TYPE OF ILLNESS Intoxication as well as infection SYMPTOMS Diarrhea and abdominal pain CONTROL MEASURES  Rapidly cool meat dishes. cooling methods are discussed in detail on pages 2829.  Rapidly reheat foods to 165F within 2 hours.  Avoid preparing foods days in advance.  Do not reheat foods on the steam table or any other hot holding equipment.  Hold hot foods at 140F or above. 20 fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E ILLNESS Bacillus cereus gastroenteritis
P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E ILLNESS Bacillus cereus gastroenteritis BACTERIA Bacillus cereus SOURCE Soil and dust, cereal crops FOODS INVOLVED Rice, starchy foodspasta, potatoes, dry food products, meats, and milk. ONSET TIME 30 minutes5 hours TYPE OF ILLNESS Intoxication as well as infection SYMPTOMS Nausea, abdominal pain and watery diarrhea CONTROL MEASURES  Do not keep foods at room temperature.  Rapidly cool meat dishes.  Rapidly reheat foods to 165F within 2 hours.  Serve cooked foods quickly after preparation. ILLNESS Vibrio parahaemolyticus gastroenteritis BACTERIA Vibrio parahaemolyticus SOURCE Clams, oysters, scallops, shrimp, crabs FOODS INVOLVED Raw or partially cooked shellfish ONSET TIME 30 minutes5 hours TYPE OF ILLNESS Intoxication as well as infection SYMPTOMS Nausea, abdominal pain and watery diarrhea CONTROL MEASURES  Avoid eating raw or undercooked shellfish.  Purchase seafood from approved sources.  Keep all seafood refrigerated at
undercooked shellfish.  Purchase seafood from approved sources.  Keep all seafood refrigerated at 41F or lower.  Avoid cross contamination. ILLNESS Hepatitis A VIRUS Hepatitis A virus SOURCE Human feces, fecal contaminated waters, fecal contaminated produce FOODS INVOLVED Raw or partially cooked shellfish, fruits and vegetables, salads, cold cuts, water and ice. ONSET TIME 1550 days SYMPTOMS Fever, malaise, lassitude,nausea, abdominal pain and jaundice CONTROL MEASURES  Obtain shellfish from approved sources.  Ensure that food workers practice good personal hygiene.  Avoid cross contamination.  Clean and sanitize food contact surfaces.  Use potable water. ILLNESS Norovirus gastroentritis VIRUS Norovirus aka norwalklike virus SOURCE Human feces, fecal contaminated waters, fecal contaminated produce FOODS INVOLVED Readytoeat foods such as salads, sandwiches, baked products,oysters, fruits and vegetables. ONSET TIME 1248 hours SYMPTOMS Fever, vomiting, watery diarrhea, abdominal pains
and vegetables. ONSET TIME 1248 hours SYMPTOMS Fever, vomiting, watery diarrhea, abdominal pains CONTROL MEASURES  Prevent ill food workers from working until fully recovered.  Ensure that food workers practice good personal hygiene.  Obtain shellfish from approved sources.  Avoid cross contamination.  Clean and sanitize food contact surfaces.  Use potable water. ILLNESS Rotavirus gastroenteritis VIRUS Rotavirus SOURCE Human feces, fecal contaminated waters, fecal contaminated food FOODS INVOLVED Readytoeat foods such as salads, sandwiches, baked products, contam inated water ONSET TIME 13 days SYMPTOMS Vomiting,watery diarrhea, abdominal pains and mild fever CONTROL MEASURES  Prevent ill food workers from working until fully recovered.  Ensure that food workers practice good personal hygiene.  Avoid cross contamination.  Clean and sanitize food contact surfaces.  Use potable water. ILLNESS Astrovirus gastroenteritis VIRUS Astrovirus SOURCE Human feces, fecal contaminated food FOODS
Astrovirus gastroenteritis VIRUS Astrovirus SOURCE Human feces, fecal contaminated food FOODS INVOLVED Readytoeat foods such as salads, sandwiches, baked products, contam inated water. ONSET TIME 1070 hours 21 N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E SYMPTOMS Vomiting, watery diarrhea, abdomi nal pains and mild fever. Outbreaks are more likely to occur in daycare and eldercare facilities. CONTROL MEASURES  Prevent ill food workers from working until fully recovered.  Ensure that food workers practice good personal hygiene.  Avoid cross contamination.  Clean and sanitize food contact surfaces.  Use potable water. ILLNESS Trichinosis PARASITE Trichinella spiralis SOURCE Pigs, wild game such as bear and walrus FOODS INVOLVED Raw and undercooked pork, pork products, bear , walrus and any other food products contaminated with the former. ONSET TIME 428 days SYMPTOMS Gastroenteritis, fever, facial edema, muscular pains, prostration, and labored
428 days SYMPTOMS Gastroenteritis, fever, facial edema, muscular pains, prostration, and labored breathing. CONTROL MEASURES  Cook pork and pork products to 150F or higher for at least 15 seconds.  Wash, rinse and sanitize equipment used to process pork and pork products before use.  Purchase all pork and pork products from approved suppliers. ILLNESS Anisakiasis PARASITE Anisakis simplex SOURCE Marine fish saltwater species FOODS INVOLVED Raw, undercooked, or improperly frozen fish like pacific salmon, mackerel, halibut, monkfish, herring, flounder, fluke, cod, haddock, and other fish used for sushi, sashimi, and ceviche. ONSET TIME Within hours SYMPTOMS Mild cases include tingling or tickling sensation in throat, vomiting, or coughing up worms. Severe cases include debilitating stomach pains, vomiting, and diarrhea. CONTROL MEASURES  Obtain seafood from approved sources.  Thoroughly cook all seafood to 140F or higher.  Only use sushigrade fish for sushi and sashimi.  Any fish to be
all seafood to 140F or higher.  Only use sushigrade fish for sushi and sashimi.  Any fish to be consumed raw should be frozen at minus 31F for 15 hours. ILLNESS Cyclosporiasis PARASITE Cyclospora cayetanensis SOURCE Human feces fecal contaminated water FOODS INVOLVED Raw produce, raw milk, water. ONSET TIME About a week SYMPTOMS Watery diarrhea, mild fever, nausea, abdominal pains. CONTROL MEASURES  Ensure food workers practice good personal hygiene.  Wash all produce fruits and vegetables, especially berries, thoroughly.  Use potable water. QUICK REVIEW 1. Salmonella enteritidis is mainly associated with  2. Food workers sick with an illness that can be transmitted by contact with food or through food should be  3. We can control the growth of the microorganism clostridium perfringens by  ,,. 4. Ground meats such as hamburgers must be cooked to a minimum temperature of 158F to eliminate  5. Clostridium botulinum causes the disease known as botulism.  TRUE  FALSE 6. The microorganism
5. Clostridium botulinum causes the disease known as botulism.  TRUE  FALSE 6. The microorganism Clostridium botulinum is mainly associated with the following Smoked fishtuna fish 7. The following illness has been associated with undercooked shell eggs  8. Staphylococcal food intoxication is a common cause of foodborne illness that can be prevented by cooking foods thoroughly.  TRUE  FALSE 9. Shigellosis can be eliminated by cooking pork to 150F for 15 seconds.  TRUE  FALSE 10. Scombroid poisoning occurs when someone eats decomposing  11. Viral Hepatitis is caused by Bacillus cereus.  TRUE  FALSE 12. Escherichia coli O157H7 is responsible for causing Hemolytic Uremic Syndrome HUS among children.  TRUE  FALSE 13. Escherichia coli O157H7 is mainly associated with ground poultry.  TRUE  FALSE 14. The illness trichinosis is caused by a parasite known as Trichinella spiralis.  TRUE  FALSE 15. To avoid trichinosis, NYC Health Code requires pork to be cooked to a minimum temperature of  16.
To avoid trichinosis, NYC Health Code requires pork to be cooked to a minimum temperature of  16. Shellfish tags must be kept with the product until its used up and then filed away for  17. Raw, marinated or partially cooked fish is made safe by freezing at F for  fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L 22 N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E P ersonal hygiene simply means keeping yourself, and your clothes as clean as possible. Proper personal hygiene is extremely important in preventing food borne illness since people are the main source of food contamination. Food workers should always practice the highest standards of personal hygiene to ensure that food is safe from biological, chemical, and physical hazards. Personal hygiene enhances the good public image that is so essential to a good food business. Highest standards of personal hygiene include proper hand washing, short and clean fingernails, notifying super visor
of personal hygiene include proper hand washing, short and clean fingernails, notifying super visor when ill, use of proper hair restraints, proper use of disposable gloves, refraining from wearing jewelry, avoid eating, drinking, smoking or otherwise engaging in any activity that may contaminate the foods. Personal hygiene is a combination of several components described below Proper Work Attire Employees who prepare or serve food products, or wash and sanitize equipment and utensils must wear clean outer gar ments. It is recommended that aprons, chef jackets, or smocks are worn over street clothing. Whenever food workers leave the food area, they should remove their apron and store it properly. For example, when using the bathroom, on breaks, taking out trash, or delivering food. Keep personal clothing and other personal items away from food han dling and storage areas. Employers must provide adequate storage areas for employees personal belongings. Hair Restraints Food workers are
provide adequate storage areas for employees personal belongings. Hair Restraints Food workers are required to wear hair restraints such as hair nets, caps, hats, scarves, or other form of hair restraints that are effective facial hair included. This is necessary to pre vent them from touching their hair as well as to prevent hair from falling into the food. Wearing of Jewelry Wearing jewelry such as necklaces, bracelets, earrings, and other jewelry while working poses a physical hazard and as such should not be worn by food workers when preparing or serving food a wedding band is an exception to this rule. Importance of Clean Hands Clean hands are extremely important for the safety of food. Most people do not realize that as part of the normal flora, we carry a lot of different disease causing microorganisms on our hands. For instance, it is estimated that roughly 5075  of all healthy humans carry the Staphylococcus bacteria mainly in the nasal passage which can easily be transferred
carry the Staphylococcus bacteria mainly in the nasal passage which can easily be transferred to hands by simply touching or blowing the nose. About 6070 of the healthy humans carry Clostridium perfringens, which can also be easily transmitted onto foods with hands. In addition to the normal flora, there are also transient microorganisms found on our hands that we pick up through incidental contact by touching various objects. For instance, traveling to work from home, we may end up touching various contaminated sur faces, e.g., door handles, turnstiles, etc. This is the reason why hands must be washed often and thoroughly. Hand washing Washing hands properly is the most effective way of removing microorganisms. Proper hand wash ing involves the use of both hot and cold running water, soap, and paper towels or a hot air dryer. PERSONAL HYGIENE Use hot and cold running water Wet hands and apply soap, lather generously up to the elbow Rub hands together for 20 seconds Rinse hands
and apply soap, lather generously up to the elbow Rub hands together for 20 seconds Rinse hands thoroughly Use a brush on the nails. Dry hands on disposable paper towels or a hot air dryer The Steps of Proper Hand Washing fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L 23 fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E Always ensure that hands are washed and dried thoroughly before starting work, between tasks, and before working with food products, equipment, utensils, and linen. Correct hand washing includes cleaning the backs of hands, palms, forearms, between fingers and under the fingernails using hot water, soap, and a fingernail brush. Handwashing sinks must be located within 25 feet of each food preparation, food service and ware washing area, and in or adjacent to employee and patron bathrooms. Doors, equipment and other material cannot block handwashing sinks. Bare hand contact The
Doors, equipment and other material cannot block handwashing sinks. Bare hand contact The New York City Health Code prohibits the handling of readyto eat foods with bare hands. Although proper hand washing reduces a sig nificant number of microorganisms from hands, but never removes all of them. In addition to that, many people can also be carriers of disease causing microorganisms without getting sick themselves. These indi viduals may not show the symptoms asymptomatic or they may have recovered from an illness, but they can easily pass these germs to others through contact with food or food areas. This is why it is important to prevent bare hand contact with readytoeat foods by means of san itary gloves or other utensils such as tongs, spatula, deli paper tissue, or other utensils. Exclusion of sick Employees Any food employee who is sick with an illness that is transmissible through contact with food must be excluded from working in the food establishment until fully recovered.
contact with food must be excluded from working in the food establishment until fully recovered. Some of these illnesses include  Amebiasis  Cholera  Cryptosporidiosis  Diptheria  E. Coli 0157H7  Giardiasis  Hepatitis A  Poliomyelitis  Salmonellosis  Shigellosis  Streptococcal sore throat including scarlet fever  Superficial staphylococcal infection  Tuberculosis  Typhoid  Yersiniosis  Infected cut or boil  Any other communicable disease It is the employees responsibility to inform the supervisor in case of an illness, however supervisors should be vigilant and observe any signs that may indicate that the employee may be sick. Train employees properly on the hazards of working while ill with a disease transmissible through contact with or through food. Cuts, Wounds, and Sores All cuts and wounds that are not infected on the hands and arms must be completely covered by a waterproof bandage. Wear single use gloves or finger cots over any bandages on the hands and fingers. The Dont
bandage. Wear single use gloves or finger cots over any bandages on the hands and fingers. The Dont Habits 1 Dont smoke or use tobacco in any form while in the food preparation area. 2 Dont work when you have a fever, cough, cold, upset stomach or diarrhea. 3 Dont store personal medication among food. 4 Dont work if you have an infected, pusfilled wound. 5 Dont use a hand sanitizer as a substitute for hand washing. A hand sanitizer may be used in addition to proper hand washing. 6 Dont spit about while preparing food. Personal Hygiene Checklist At the beginning of each work day ask yourself the following questions 4 Did I shower or take a bath before coming to work 4 Am I sick with a fever, cold or diarrhea 4 Do I have any infected cuts or burns 4 Are my nails clean, trimmed and free from nail polish 4 Are my apron and clothing clean 4 Did I remove my jewelry 4 Am I wearing my hat, cap or hairnet QUICK REVIEW 1. As Per New York City Health Code, hands must be washed thoroughly at
cap or hairnet QUICK REVIEW 1. As Per New York City Health Code, hands must be washed thoroughly at least 3 times every day.  TRUE  FALSE 2. Sick food workers who can transmit their illness thorough contact with food should be prevented from working until they are well.  TRUE  FALSE 3. Hands must be washed thoroughly after , , , , , . 4. The NYC Health Code requires hand wash sinks to be readily accessible at all  and . 5. The hand wash sinks must be provided with  and  running water,  and . 6. The NYC Health Code requires that all food workers wear proper hair restraint.  TRUE  FALSE 7. A food worker with an infected cut on hisher hand  8. During hand washing hands must be rubbed together for at least  9. Clean aprons can be used for wiping hands.  TRUE  FALSE 10. Hand sanitizer can be used in place of hand washing during busy periods.  TRUE  FALSE 24 N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E T his is another step during which care is needed
E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E T his is another step during which care is needed to main tain food safety. Preparation refers to the actions that are necessary before a food item can be cooked, or in the case of a food that is served raw, actions that are neces sary before it can be served. Thawing Thawing is also referred to as defrosting. The Health Code requires that whole frozen poultry must be thawed before being cooked, however, a single portion may be cooked from a frozen state. Other potentially hazardous products should be treated in the same way individual portions may be cooked from a frozen state, while all others should be thawed before cooking. It is important to use methods that will allow the entire mass to thaw evenly. Any method that only allows the outside surface to thaw while the inner portion remains frozen is unacceptable, since the outside surface will be in the danger zone for a prolonged period of time. The New York City Health Code allows
will be in the danger zone for a prolonged period of time. The New York City Health Code allows the following acceptable thawing methods 1 Frozen foods can be removed from the freezer and stored in a refrigerator a day or two before they are needed. In this way the frozen item will defrost but will not go above 41F. 2 Frozen foods may be sub merged under water with the cold water faucet open and the water running continuously so that any loose particles may float and run off. 3 Frozen foods may be thawed in a microwave oven but this may only be done if  After thawing, the food item is removed immediately for cooking in the regular oven or stove.  The entire cooking process takes place without interruption in the microwave oven. Cutting, Chopping, Mixing, Mincing, Breading Any necessary process that will place a food item within the tem perature danger zone must be con trolled. Preparing or processing the item in batches will minimize the amount of time that item is out of refrigerated
or processing the item in batches will minimize the amount of time that item is out of refrigerated storage and the oppor tunity for microorganisms to grow. After preparation, if the food is not cooked immediately, it must again be refrigerated until it is ready for cooking. Care must be taken to ensure that potentially hazardous foods are never left out in the tem perature danger zone except for very short periods during preparation. Cross contamination This is a term typically used for any situation where harmful microorganisms transfer from a raw or contaminated food to a cooked or readytoeat food. All raw products, particularly meat, fish and eggs, have harmful microorganisms. Therefore, it is important to keep them separate from cooked or readytoeat foods. Crosscontamination can happen in many ways, the following are but a few FOOD PREPARATION Thawing Methods Refrigerator Cold Running Water Microwave NEW DEDICATED FOODWASHING SINKS Crosscontamination happens when bacteria from
Water Microwave NEW DEDICATED FOODWASHING SINKS Crosscontamination happens when bacteria from one food spread to another. This is a common cause of foodborne illnesses. One way to prevent this is to keep cooked and readytoeat foods away from potentially hazardous raw foods, such as meat, poultry and fish. To reduce the risk of crosscontamination, the Health Code now requires washing food in 1. A singlecompartment culinary sink used for this purpose only. 2. A dedicated compartment of a multi compartment sink. 3. A foodgrade container or colander if neither of the above is available. 4. Foodwashing sinks must be cleaned and sanitized prior to use and after the washing of raw meat. 5. A sink in which food is washed may not be used as a slop or utility sink or for handwashing. fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L 25 fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E  Preparing raw
N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E  Preparing raw chicken for cook ing and then preparing a fresh salad without washing hands thoroughly.  Preparing raw chicken and then cutting the cooked chicken on the same cutting board.  Storing a raw product above a cooked product in such a manner that the juices of the product above fall on the product below. In all three examples, as in most cases in which cross contamination is the cause of a foodborne illness, human errors play a major role. Therefore, food workers have to be vigilant to prevent these situations from occurring. Bare hand contact Readytoeat foods served by infected food workers have proven to be a serious public health problem and as such, regulations were put in place to prohibit bare hand contact with foods that will not be later cooked or reheated before serving. What kind of foods may not be prepared with bare hands Readytoeat foods such as salads and sandwiches foods that
foods may not be prepared with bare hands Readytoeat foods such as salads and sandwiches foods that will not later be cooked to a temperature required by the Health Code and food that is not later reheated to 165F before serving. What are acceptable practices to prepare readytoeat foods The use of utensils, tongs, deli paper or sanitary gloves are accept able for preparing readytoeat foods. May readytoeat foods be touched with bare hands if the hands are washed, or a germicidal soap or hand sanitizer is used No. Although hand washing is effective in reducing contamination, not all of the contamination can be removed from the hands. Germicidal soaps and hand sanitizer are not effective in food industry because of the high levels of fat molecules on workers hands. These molecules allow microbes to survive. What happens if gloves, deli paper or other utensils are not available to prepare readytoeat foods If appropriate utensils are not available, readytoeat foods may not be prepared
readytoeat foods If appropriate utensils are not available, readytoeat foods may not be prepared until bare hand contact with food can be prevented. If bare hand contact with readyto eat foods is observed by health department inspectors, a violation will be recorded on the inspection report and enforcement action will be taken. Any readytoeat food that has been prepared with bare hands is considered to be contaminated and should be discarded. How often should disposable gloves be changed Disposable gloves must be changed when they become contaminated, torn or when the food service worker leaves the food preparation area. They should also be changed frequent ly to minimize buildup of perspiration and bacteria inside the gloves. May I use the same pair of dispos able gloves to prepare raw meat or poultry and then prepare ready toeat food No. This is an example of cross contamination. Disposable gloves worn during preparation of raw foods, such as uncooked meat and poultry, must not be
gloves worn during preparation of raw foods, such as uncooked meat and poultry, must not be used to pre pare readytoeat food. How can readytoeat foods be prepared during grilling and slic ing operations A glove can be worn on the hand that is used to prepare readytoeat ingredients, leaving the other hand uncovered for placing raw ingredients on the grill. Wear tight fitting gloves when operating a slicing machine or chopping or cutting food. It is safer to use tight fitting gloves. C ooking is a critical step in the food preparation process. It is at this stage that we have the opportu nity to destroy microorganisms or germs that are on raw foods. Cooking food to an internal tempera ture that will destroy the microor ganisms normally found on it will ensure the safety of that food. The required internal temperature must be reached without any interrup tion of the cooking process. It is important to use a sanitized, properly calibrated thermometer to verify that the required minimum
important to use a sanitized, properly calibrated thermometer to verify that the required minimum cooking temperature is reached. Whole Meat Roasts Roast beef , beef steaks, corned beef, lamb roasts, pork and cured pork roasts are to be cooked to the folowing minimum temperatures for the corresponding times, unless otherwise requested by the customer COOKING, HOT HOLDING, COOLING, REHEATING Temperature Time 130  F 112 minutes 131  F 89 minutes 133  F 56 minutes 135  F 36 minutes 136  F 28 minutes 138  F 18 minutes 140  F 12 minutes 8 minutes 142  F 145  F 4 minutes Poultry, stuffed meats, and stuffing containing meats 165 F for 15 seconds Take special precautions with poultry, since there are more types and higher counts of microorganisms present. Always cook stuffing separately from the poultry, because stuffing acts as insulation. Ground meats, and foods containing ground meats 158 F for 15 seconds Most meats are likely to be contaminated with harmful microorganisms on the surface.
for 15 seconds Most meats are likely to be contaminated with harmful microorganisms on the surface. When meat is ground, the surface microorganisms are mixed throughout the product. Pork and foods containing pork 150F for 15 seconds This is the temperature needed to destroy the trichinella spp., as well as other microorganisms such as toxoplasma gondii. Shell eggs and foods containing shell eggs 145 F for 15 seconds Exception Eggs may be prepared at a lower temperature when requested by customer. Pooling of eggs is not permitted. Only use pasteurized eggs for recipes that call for no cook ing or limited cooking. e.g. Caesar Salad dressing, eggnog, hollandaise sauce, etc. All other meats and fish 140 F for 15 seconds This includes lobsters, shrimps, clams, oysters, mussels, lamb, goat, etc. Minimum Internal Product Cooking Temperature Notes Cooking Temperatures for Various Foods 26 N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E NEW OUTDOOR COOKING
Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E NEW OUTDOOR COOKING REQUIREMENTS Cooking outdoors is now allowed provided the establishment protects food and equipment. To cook outdoors, the establish ment must 1. Have permission to cook outdoors from the Buildings and Fire Departments and any other agency as required by law. 2. Maintain complete control of the outdoor cooking space. 3. Provide a hand wash sink if food is prepared outdoors. 4. Protect food, utensils and cooking equipment from contamination using awnings, tents, screens or verminresistant containers. 5. Store food, utensils and equipment indoors when the outdoor area is not in operation. 6. Prevent nuisances, such as from smoke, garbage, noise or pests. 7. Construct the floor using smooth, durable, nonabsorbent and easily cleanable material that is free of gaps. 8. Have sufficient lighting to allow safe operations and cleaning. The Health Code requires 540 Lux 50 foot candles of lighting
to allow safe operations and cleaning. The Health Code requires 540 Lux 50 foot candles of lighting at surfaces where food workers are preparing and processing food or using utensils or equipment such as knives, slicers, grinders or saws. Note Cooking is not allowed on a street or sidewalk, except during street fairs or other events where City permission has been granted. fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L 27 fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E Cooking in a Microwave Oven Microwave cooking allows for a faster cooking process, however the cooking is uneven and can lead to cold spots where bacteria can easi ly multiply to a dangerous level. It is important to follow the guidelines below to ensure proper cooking  Arrange food items evenly and cover the dish with a lid or plastic wrap the moist heat will help destroy harmful bacteria and ensure uniform cooking.  When
or plastic wrap the moist heat will help destroy harmful bacteria and ensure uniform cooking.  When cooking large cuts of meats, adjust the settings to medium power, and cook for longer periods of time to ensure proper cooking.  Stir or rotate food halfway through the process to eliminate cold spots where harmful bacteria can sur vive, and for more even cooking.  Foods may be partially cooked in the microwave oven and then transferred to conventional oven for completion, however this trans fer must be done immediately.  Let food stand for at least two minutes after microwaving to allow even distribution of heat throughout the product.  Use a food thermometer to verify that the proper temperature is reached. Due to uneven cooking process in the microwave ovens, add 25F to the final cooking temperature to ensure thorough cooking. Hot Holding Once food is cooked, if not served immediately, it must be held at the proper temperature. Potentially hazardous food PHF that have just finished
it must be held at the proper temperature. Potentially hazardous food PHF that have just finished the cooking process or that have just been reheated must either be served immediately or held hot for future service. These foods must be held constantly at 140F or higher. Failure to hold such foods at the adequate temperature will result in the growth of bacteria. This common error results in many cases of food borne illness each year. A hot holding unit must be used to hot hold potentially hazardous foods properly. This unit must hold foods at 140F or higher. Care and constant monitoring are required to ensure that foods do not fall below 140F. These foods should never be stored at room temperature. Place only hot foods 140F in a hot holding unit, never cold or warm foods. The unit must first be preheated. The water in the reser voir should be approximately 180F before use. Hot holding units should not be used to reheat cold foods unless they are designed for this purpose. Constant
units should not be used to reheat cold foods unless they are designed for this purpose. Constant monitoring of these foods is required to ensure that they remain at 140F. Assign an employee to check food temperatures frequently and have these temperatures recorded. An adequate number of properly functioning hot holding units are needed to store all potentially haz ardous foods adequately. Foods placed in an overcrowded or over stocked steam table will not receive sufficient heat and will drop into the temperature danger zone. All foods must be placed directly in or near enough to the heat source to provide adequate heating. Food trays should not be stacked on top of each other doublestacked as this results in insufficient heating of the upper trays and possible contamination of the lower tray. Consumer Advisory Effective January 1st, 2016, A written consumer advisory must be provided to patrons for any meat, fish, molluscan shellfish, or unpasteurized raw shell eggs served raw or
to patrons for any meat, fish, molluscan shellfish, or unpasteurized raw shell eggs served raw or partially cooked. The following statement  CONSUMING RAW OR UNDERCOOKED MEATS, POULTRY, SEAFOOD, SHELLFISH, OR EGGS MAY INCREASE YOUR RISK OF FOODBORNE ILLNESS, must appear on menus, menu boards, brochures, signage, food labels, table tents, or placards. with either a A description or identification of the specific foods being served raw or undercooked, such as,  oysters on the half shell raw oysters, or  rawegg Caesar salad dressing,as applicable or b Noted by an asterisk or other mark next to the listed food item on a menu or menu board with a footnote that references the consumer advisory stated above. Limitations on service Raw or undercooked meat, eggs, fish or molluscan shellfish cannot be served in facilities that serve higher risk populations  senior centers, charitable feeding programs, custodial care facilities, hospitals and health care facilities, adult day care and assisted
custodial care facilities, hospitals and health care facilities, adult day care and assisted living programs, child care, childrens camps, preschool programs, and elementary and secondary schools. 28 N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E Always  Place hot foods ONLY 140F or higher on a hot holding unit.  Place foods on the steam table after the water has been heated to approximately180F.  Check the temperature frequently and enter the results on the log sheet.  Keep food covered as this will help retain heat and moisture and also protect the food from contamination.  Store food in the tray wells of the unit. Food in double stacked or overfilled trays will not receive sufficient heat.  Food in deep containers should be stirred occasionally to distrib ute heat evenly. Never  Never mix freshly prepared food with foods that have been reheated.  Never reheat food in the hot holding unit, unless the unit is designed for such purpose.  Never
Never reheat food in the hot holding unit, unless the unit is designed for such purpose.  Never place any food in a hot holding unit that has not been preheated. Cooling Cooked potentially hazardous food items that are held for later service must be cooled rapidly and stored in a refrigerator until ready for use. When foods are allowed to cool over a long a period of time, bacteria grow to sufficient numbers that may cause foodborne illnesses. The NYC Health Code requires that all potentially hazardous foods prepared for later service be cooled down rapidly. This means that with in the first two hours of cooling, the foods must be cooled from 140F to 70F and then go from 70F to 41F within an additional four hours or less. This rapid cooling requirement limits the length of time that potentially hazardous food spends in the temperature danger zone thus limiting the opportunity for growth of harmful bacteria. Food in large, deep containers and large thick pieces of meat are difficult
of harmful bacteria. Food in large, deep containers and large thick pieces of meat are difficult to cool down quickly. Great care must be taken during the cooling of soups, sauces, gravies, stews, rice, chili, whole turkey, turkey breast and whole roast beef. The temperature of cooling foods must be monitored and document ed with a food product thermome ter. Take the temperature of the cooling food each hour to ensure that it is cooling within the required time. Start these measurements at 140F. Potentially hazardous foods that have been allowed to cool over an extended period of time more than 2 hours when cooling from 140F to 70F, and more than 4 hours when cooling from 70F to 41F or below, are considered contaminated and must be discarded. It is a fact that smaller portions of food cool down faster than larger portions. Hence, to encourage faster cooling, roasts and other large cuts of meat should be cut into portions no larger than 6 pounds. Thick foods like chili and refried
of meat should be cut into portions no larger than 6 pounds. Thick foods like chili and refried beans should be poured out into shallow pans 4 inches deep. In both these cases, there is more surface area thus heat escapes faster. Cooling must take place in the refrigerator or in an ice bath. Never cool foods down by simply leaving them out at room temperature. Foods do not cool at a constant rate. Hot food tends to cool relatively quickly while still very hot the rate of cooling then slows greatly as the food temperature gets closer to the temperature of the refrigerator. The cooling tracking sheet is a good guide to show if foods are cooling properly. The food temperature must drop from 140F to 90F or lower by the end of first hour. If this doesnt happen, it clearly means that the rate of cooling is too slow and foods will never reach 70F within 2 hours. Many food workers underestimate the amount of time it takes for foods to cool down. Under typical restau rant kitchen
underestimate the amount of time it takes for foods to cool down. Under typical restau rant kitchen refrigeration, a onegallon container of cooked ground meat may take up to 15 hours to cool down. For this reason, it is essential to monitor food temperatures during the cooling process. NEW PLASTIC MICROWAVABLE CONTAINERS ALLOWED Microwavesafe containers prevent harmful substances from leaching into foods. To protect diners, food establishments must use containers that display the words microwave safe or one of these symbols Microwave Safe 2 4 140 70 HOURS 41 fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L Established Methods to Assist Rapid Cooling  Always leave food uncovered dur ing cooling this will hasten the cooling process, replace the cover or lid only after the food has cooled down to 41F.  Foods must be cooled in a refrig erator or in an ice bath. They should never be allowed to cool while stored at room temperature, for example, being left out on top of a counter.  Cut
to cool while stored at room temperature, for example, being left out on top of a counter.  Cut large pieces of meat into smaller pieces, 6 pounds or less. Such small portions will cool rapidly. Larger pieces take longer to cool.  Do not cool foods in large deep pots. Pour out the contents of large containers into much smaller ones or into shallow pans 4 inches deep with the product depth of 1 to 2 inches.  Use an ice water bath. An ice water bath can be made up by filling a sink or other large con tainer with ice and water. Place the container of hot food into the ice water bath. While foods are cooling in this ice bath, stir the food periodically. Do not forget to replace the ice as it melts away.  You may apply ice directly into food as an ingredient. Thick soups and gravies may be cooled down rapidly by adding ice directly into the food.  Use a Rapid Chill unit or a Blast chiller.  Insert an ice paddle into food and stir.  You may combine methods above, e.g., cut foods into small
Insert an ice paddle into food and stir.  You may combine methods above, e.g., cut foods into small pieces and place in shallow pans in an icewater bath.  Metal containers such a stainless steel or aluminum are great con ductors of heat. Use metal con tainers for all cooling operations. Reheating The Health Code requires that potentially hazardous food that is cooked, cooled and reheated for hot holding must be reheated to 165F or above for 15 seconds within two hours and held at 140F or above until served. This procedure destroys the bacteria that cause food poison ing and prevents them from grow ing in the food. Potentially hazardous foods reheated in a microwave oven must be covered and reheated to a tem perature of at least 190F and allowed to stand covered for two minutes afterwards. Microwave ovens cook unevenly and standing allows the temperature to be equally distributed throughout the food. Readytoeat food taken from a commercially processed, hermetical ly sealed container or
the food. Readytoeat food taken from a commercially processed, hermetical ly sealed container or from an intact package from a food processing plant that is subject to City, State or Federal inspection, needs to be heated to 140F within two hours from removal from container or package and held at that tempera ture until served. Cooked and refrigerated food that is prepared for immediate 1 to 2 yy yy yy 29 fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E Cooling Tracking Sheet Hour Temperature Start 140 Recommended 1 90 2 70 3 4 5 6 41 30 N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E QUICK REVIEW 1. Previously cooked and refrigerated foods that will be served from a hot holding unit must be rapidly reheated to 165F using  2. When bacteria from a raw food get into a cooked or readytoeat food, this is called  3. The correct cooking temperature for poultry,
into a cooked or readytoeat food, this is called  3. The correct cooking temperature for poultry, stuffed meat and stuffing is  4. Thick foods cool faster..  5. It is a good practice to thaw frozen foods by leaving them out on the kitchen counter overnight.  TRUE  FALSE 6. Hot foods placed in a refrigerator for cooling must never be covered.  TRUE  FALSE 7. To prevent illness, pork must be cooked to an internal temperature of  F 8. Placing food on the counter overnight can be used as an effective rapid cooling technique  TRUE  FALSE 9. The Health Code requires that frozen foods be properly thawed before being cooked. The exception to this rule is  10. Ground meat and foods containing ground meat must be cooked to an internal temperature of  11. Clean bare hands may be used when working with readytoeat foods  TRUE  FALSE 12. When using disposable gloves, they must be changed often to prevent contamination of food  TRUE  FALSE 13. Hot holding units can be used for reheating foods as
prevent contamination of food  TRUE  FALSE 13. Hot holding units can be used for reheating foods as long as the temperature reaches 165F within two hours  TRUE  FALSE service to an individual customer may be served at any temperature that customer requests. Foods should be prepared as close to the serving time as possible and in quantities that will minimize left overs, thus eliminating any need for cooling and reheating. Time as a Public Health Control A Health Code change allows food establishments to hold potentially hazardous foods without temperature control if certain time limits and other guidelines are met. Using time only to monitor food, instead of time and temperature, is called Time as a Public Health Control. Using time as a public health control is a concept that recognizes that signifi cant bacteria growth or toxin pro duction are not possible within a limited time period. The Health Code allows food service establish ments to use Time as a Public Health Control to hold
The Health Code allows food service establish ments to use Time as a Public Health Control to hold hot or cold foods for a limited time without the use of heat or refrigeration. This cannot be done haphazardly. Food establishments can now hold potentially hazardous foods without temperature control for four to six hours if they meet cer tain time limits and other guide lines. Before this Health Code change, potentially hazardous hot foods had to be maintained at a minimum hot temperature, and cold foods at a maximum cold tem perature, at all times. To use Time as a Public Health Control, take the food from temperature control and Measure the foods temperature. Cold food must be 41 or colder and hot food 140 or hotter when removed from temperature control. Place a label on the food and write the time the food was removed from temperature control, the foods starting temperature and the time it will be four hours later. For cold food, write down the time it will be six hours later. Serve
it will be four hours later. For cold food, write down the time it will be six hours later. Serve hot food within four hours or discard it. For cold food, take the foods temperature after four hours and write that temperature on the label. If the temperature is more than 70 at four hours, immediately discard the food. If the temperature is less than 70, you can hold the food for an additional two hours. You must throw away any food not served within six hours. For more information on these items, see Page 81 or visit nyc.govhealthfoodservice. fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L 31 fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E T he Center for Disease Control CDC cites contaminated equipment utensils, meat slicers, cut ting boards etc. as a leading cause of food borne disease outbreaks. Cleaning and sanitizing are often confused as one and the same, how ever these are two
outbreaks. Cleaning and sanitizing are often confused as one and the same, how ever these are two separate and dis tinct processes. Cleaning is the process of removing visible contam ination  soil, grease, food particles, dirt, etc., from any equipment or utensil. Sanitizing on the other hand, reduces harmful microorgan isms to an acceptable level, which in turn reduces the possibility of dis ease transmission. It is extremely important that all food contact surfaces are clean and sanitary. Any part of utensil or equipment that comes in contact with food is called food contact sur face. These may also include sur faces from which food may drip, drain, or splash back on to other food contact surfaces or food. For example, when using microwave ovens, the food particles stuck on the sides or top of the interior of microwave oven may splash or drip back on to the foods being reheated or cooked in the microwave oven. It is important to note that although most people are familiar with the
in the microwave oven. It is important to note that although most people are familiar with the concept of sanitizing, the proper procedures are often overlooked or misunderstood, especially when it comes to the chemistry and exact ness of the process. There are two acceptable methods of sanitizing hot water sanitizing and chemical sanitizing. Hot water sanitizing This method of sanitizing involves the use of hot water and a three compartment sink. Items to be sanitized are soaked in hot water at a temperature of 170F for at least 30 seconds. Generally, the third compartment sink is filled with hot water and heated by as a gas burner or electrical coils water is heated to 170F and then main tained at that level. A long handled mesh basket is needed to soak uten sils. A thermometer must be used to determine temperature readings. Chemical sanitizing This method requires even more precise knowledge and greater con trols than the hot water sanitizing method since the effectiveness of the
knowledge and greater con trols than the hot water sanitizing method since the effectiveness of the sanitizer is dependant upon exact amounts of chemicals used. When using commercially prepared sanitizers, simply follow the manufacturers instructions. The most common way of making a sanitizing solution is by using regular household bleach 5.25 Sodium Hypochlorite. In this respect, ensure that the bleach is not ultra bleach or extra strength bleach. It is also worth noting that only pure bleach should be used without any additional additives, and it should never be mixed with detergent which will reduce the strength of the sanitizing solutions. The following table explains how to make various sanitizing solutions using household bleach 5.25 Sodium Hypochlorite. The table above provides a guide to using sanitizing solutions for manual sanitizing with different chemicals. Wiping Cloths Sufficient number of wiping cloths for cleaning and sanitizing must be available in every work area.
number of wiping cloths for cleaning and sanitizing must be available in every work area. Due to the fact that bacteria Chemical Chemical Strength Solution Method Temperature Time Concentration Chlorine Soaking  immersion 75140 F 1 minute 50 PPM household bleach With 5.25 Sodium Hypochlorite Chlorine Swabbing wiping 75140 F na 100 PPM household bleach spraying, pouring With 5.25 Sodium Hypochlorite Iodine Soaking  immersion 75 1 minute 12.5 PPM High temperature not recommended Quaternary Soaking  immersion    Ammonium As specified by the manufacturer. Compounds See label for instructions. Chlorine Strength Amount Amount Concentration of Bleach of water 50 PPM 12 Oz. 1 gallon 100 PPM 1 Oz. 1 gallon 200 PPM 2 Oz. 1 gallon CLEANING AND SANITIZING 32 N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E grow and multiply in moist envi ronments, moist wiping cloths must be stored in a bucket of sanitizing solution when they are not in use. The strength of
cloths must be stored in a bucket of sanitizing solution when they are not in use. The strength of this solution must be at least 50 PPM. The sanitizing solution must be changed frequent ly since food debris uses up the san itizer quickly. Ware Washing Manual Facilities For manual washing and sanitiz ing of utensils, a stainless steel sink with no fewer than three compart ments should be provided. A two compartment sink may be used for the washing and sanitizing of bar glasses. In these cases an electrical brush device should be used in con junction with a combination deter gentsanitizer in the sink compart ment used for washing utensils. The sink compartments must be large enough to accommodate the largest piece of equipment or utensil to be cleaned and each compartment should be supplied with adequate hot and cold potable running water. In the case of equipment too large to be sanitized by immersion, the swabbing of such equipment with a solution of at least twice the concentration
by immersion, the swabbing of such equipment with a solution of at least twice the concentration required for the sanitizing solution when used for immersion is also acceptable. Mechanical Facilities A commercial dishwashing machine approved by NSF under Standard 3 should be provided. The installa tion and required appurtenances should be in conformance with NSF Standard 34, the NSF Manual on Sanitation Aspects of installation of Food Service Equipment, and applic able code requirements. Among the specific requirements for installation of machines that use chemicals to achieve sanitization are the following  The chemical sanitizing feeder should be approved for use with the specific make and model of the machine in question.  A visual flow indicator is suggest ed to facilitate monitoring of the operation of the sanitizing agent feeder. Other indicating devices such as audible alarms may also be used. The flow indicating devices should be installed so as to be easily viewed by the
may also be used. The flow indicating devices should be installed so as to be easily viewed by the operator. General Adequate facilities should be pro vided for preflushing or prescrap ing equipment and utensils. A floor drain is recommended in the immediate vicinity of the washing area and any area where wet pots, utensils and equipment are air drying. Drying Facilities Adequate facilities must be pro vided to airdry washed utensils and equipment. Adequately sized drain boards, or easily moveable dish tables, fabricated in conformance with NSF standards and separate for soiled and cleaned utensils should be provided. The drain boards and dish tables should be pitched a minimum of 18 inch per foot and drainage directed into a sink so as to prevent contami nation of other areas of the dish table or drain board. Drain boards may generally be at least 36 inches to 48 inches long and 30 inches wide. Principles of Food Preparation and Service During food preparation, improper techniques
wide. Principles of Food Preparation and Service During food preparation, improper techniques may contaminate the product with diseasecausing organisms. It is for this purpose that sanitary procedures must be observed. Listed below are some principles which should be followed. SCRAPE WASH RINSE SANITIZE DRAIN PRERINSE Wash in first com partment with warm water at 110120F using a good wash ing compound, brush and elbow grease. Washing compound does not sanitize utensils. Rinse utensils in second compartment by immer sion in clean, warm water. Washing com pound is rinsed off. Change the rinse water frequently. Do not rinse dishes in dirty water. Approved Method for HandWashing Dishes and Utensils Scrape and PreRinse with warm water from a spray type nozzle all dishes and utensils promptly before food can dry on them. This step keeps the wash water free of large food particles loosens driedon foods reduces stains on dishes saves detergent. Sanitize utensils in third compartment by use of
foods reduces stains on dishes saves detergent. Sanitize utensils in third compartment by use of hot water or a chemical sanitizer. Rinse utensils making use of a longhandled wire basket, in clean hot water at a temperature of at least 170 for no less than 12 minute. Auxiliary heat is nec essary. An alternate method is utensil immersion for a least one minute in a sanitizing solution containing at least 50 ppm available chlorine at a temperature of at least 75F. Drain and Air Dry. Do not towel dry. Toweling recontaminates uten sils. Store utensils, glasses and cups inverted in a clean dry place. fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L  Food that is to be served cold should be kept cold 41F or less through all stages of storage, pro cessing, and serving. Thawing of frozen foods should be accom plished in such a manner as to keep the surface and internal temperatures of the product 41F or less at all times. If frozen food is to be thawed in water, then cold running water is
41F or less at all times. If frozen food is to be thawed in water, then cold running water is to be used.  Foods to be served hot are to be kept so that the internal and sur face temperatures do not fall below 140F. Care must be taken in the cooling of hot foods so they do not become contaminat ed by dust, contact with work clothes, human contact, etc. Cooling should be accomplished as quickly as possible by the use of an ice water bath, fans, refrig eration, etc. To determine the temperature of foods, a food ther mometer is to be used.  Partially processed and leftover foods are to be refrigerated at 41F or below. Just prior to plac ing the food on the hotholding unit they are to be removed from the refrigerator and heated rapidly so that the internal temperatures reach 165F within two hours.  The holding of perishable foods between the temperatures of 140F and 41F is to be kept at a minimum.  Contact of readytoeat foods with bare hands is prohibited. Utensils must be used.  Do not
minimum.  Contact of readytoeat foods with bare hands is prohibited. Utensils must be used.  Do not place packing cases and cans on food work surfaces.  When it is necessary to taste foods during processing, a clean sanitized utensil should be used.  Foods are to be cooked and processed as close to the time of service as possible.  Menu planning should prevent excessive leftovers, and leftovers are not to be pooled with fresh foods during storage. Transportation of Foods In some food operations, it is necessary to transport food from a central kitchen commissary to a location where it is finally served. The food transported can be in a readytoeat state or a precooked stage, which is finally processed at the place of service. The following practices should be observed to see that contamination is not intro duced, or possible previous bacterial contamination not afforded means for extensive multiplication during this period.  Transporting containers and vehi cles should be clean and of
multiplication during this period.  Transporting containers and vehi cles should be clean and of sani tary design to facilitate cleaning.  Transporting containers and vehi cles should have acceptable refrig erating andor heating facilities for maintaining food at cold 41F or below or hot above 140F temperatures while in transit.  Food stored in transporting con tainers and vehicles should be protected from contamination.  A minimum amount of time is to be taken for the loading and unloading of foods from trans porting vehicles so foods will not be exposed to adverse tempera tures and conditions. Food Processing Techniques for Specific Types of Service Displayed Food Buffet, Smorgasbord, etc.  Hot foods are to be kept at or above 140F on the display table by use of chafing dishes, steam tables or other suitable methods.  Cold foods are to be held at tem peratures of 41F or less before being displayed and must be maintained at 41F or less while being held for service.  All foods
being displayed and must be maintained at 41F or less while being held for service.  All foods displayed are subject to contamination and as such must be discarded at the conclusion of the buffet service. Protein Type Salads Tuna, Ham, Shrimp, Egg, Chicken, Lobster, etc. These salads are always served cold and, therefore, all salad ingre dients except the seasoning and spices are to be chilled to 41F or less before use. Celery, which is almost always a component of these salads, should be treated so as to minimize its bacterial content by immersing the chopped celery in boiling water for 30 seconds, using a hand strainer or colander, then chilling immediately either by hold ing under running cold tap water or by immersing in ice water. Before the mixing operation, the previously washed can opener and tops of cans and jars holding salad ingredients should be wiped with a clean cloth. The salad ingredients should be prepared in, and mixed with clean, sanitized equipment san itary type
salad ingredients should be prepared in, and mixed with clean, sanitized equipment san itary type masher, sanitary mixing bowl, stainless steel longhandled spoon or fork, mechanical tumbler type mixer, etc.. The mixing opera tion is to be completed as quickly as possible and the finished salad immediately served or refrigerated. Additional Instructions for Specific Salads  Shrimp and Lobster Salad Immerse shrimp or lobster meat in boiling water for 30 seconds and then chill to 41F or less before preparing the salad. Fast chilling can be accomplished by 33 fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E 34 N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E placing the meat in shallow pans in the freezer or refrigerator or on top of cracked ice.  Egg SaladAfter removing shells, use a hand strainer or colander to immerse hardboiled eggs in boiling water for 30 sec
shells, use a hand strainer or colander to immerse hardboiled eggs in boiling water for 30 sec onds and then chill to 41F or less before preparing the salad. Chill the eggs by refrigerating or by placing them under cold running water.  Chicken andor Turkey Salad After removal from bones, immerse chicken or turkey meat in boiling water or boiling stock for 30 seconds and then chill to 41F before preparing the salad. Fast chilling can be accomplished by placing the meat in shallow pans in the freezer, refrigerator or on cracked ice.  Ham SaladImmerse diced ham in boiling water or boiling stock for 30 seconds and then chill to 41F or less before preparing the salad. Fast chilling can be accomplished by the same method used for chicken and shrimp. Hot Meats and Poultry Served from Steamtables or Warming Devices  Schedule the cooking of meats so they will be completed as close as possible to desired time of service.  Upon removal from the oven or stove, cooked meats are to be kept at an
to desired time of service.  Upon removal from the oven or stove, cooked meats are to be kept at an internal temperature of 140F or higher in a steamtable or other suitable device.  Maintain the water in the steam table at a temperature in excess of 180F. The water must be brought to this temperature before placing any foods in the steam table. Water in the steamtable shall be kept at a depth level so as to be in contact with the bottom and upper portions of the sides of the food container.  Refrigerated readytoeat cooked meats, especially leftovers, gravies and stocks, are to be heated rapidly to an internal temperature of 165F or higher before being placed in the steamtable or warming device. Hot stock or meat gravies may be used to reheat meats. Steamtables or other warming devices should never be used to heat up cold foods.  Cautions noted previously relative to hand contact, care of equip ment storage, and menu planning should also be followed. Salad Preparation Guide 1
care of equip ment storage, and menu planning should also be followed. Salad Preparation Guide 1 Refrigerate all salad ingredients except seasoning and spices overnight or chill to 41F or lower before use. 2 Clean work surfaces, equipment and utensils pots, pans, spoons, spatula, etc. with soap and hot water, rinse with clean water, and then give a final rinse with sanitizing solution. Stainless steel utensils and equipment are preferred in prepara tion of these foods. 3 Clean hands, fingernails, and arms thoroughly with soap and hot water and dry with single use paper towels. 4 Individuals preparing cold sal ads must not touch the ingredients or finished product with bare hands. 5 Clean and sanitize tops of cans and jars before opening. Do not use fingers to pry off can lids or drain off liquid contents. 6 Place diced celery, including precut packaged celery in a strainer and immerse in boiling water for 30 seconds, then chill to 41F or less. 7 Use clean sanitized utensils in mixing
boiling water for 30 seconds, then chill to 41F or less. 7 Use clean sanitized utensils in mixing and handling of foods. Avoid hand contact with foods. 8 Refrigerate final salad product immediately in shallow pans. 9 Salads placed in bainmarie cold plates should have a minimum internal temperature of 41F. 10 Do not fill trays above spill line. fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L 35 fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E T he Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point system was pio neered by the Pillsbury Company in the 1960s. During this period, the space program was escalating and there was a great need to provide a supply of safe food for the astronauts. This system involves following the flow of food through every step of the way, from the time the raw products are brought into the estab lishment to when the finished prod uct is ready to be served to the con sumer. By
into the estab lishment to when the finished prod uct is ready to be served to the con sumer. By observing food at each step of the production process, it is easy to recognize potential problems and take actions to prevent these prob lems before they occur. HACCP is an acronym. Its various parts are H  Hazard A hazard is any condition in which foods are contaminated by microor ganisms, foreign matter or chemi cals and in which the microorgan isms are allowed to grow or survive. A  Analysis This is the process by which a food item is studied to determine the problems that are likely to occur and how these can be prevented. Not only the ingredients are studied but the analysis includes the avail able equipment, personnel and the population to be served. CCP  Critical Control Point This is the step at which action MUST be taken to prevent, reduce or eliminate a hazard. Failure to do so at this point will render that food unfit for human consumption. Critical control points will vary
at this point will render that food unfit for human consumption. Critical control points will vary depending on the food ingredients, method of preparation and whether it is a hot or cold food. In every food preparation process, some action can be taken at every step to prevent problems. However, it is at the steps that are determined to be critical control points that some action must be taken. Some Frequently Found Hazards Microorganisms are allowed to grow by  Improper cooling procedures not using a method that will reduce food from 140F to 70F within two hours and from 70F to 41F or less in an additional 4 hours.  Inadequate hot holding holding prepared foods at less than 140F while awaiting service.  Inadequate reheating previously cooked foods not reheated to 165F within two hours using a stove or an oven. Microorganisms are allowed to survive by  Inadequate cooking not cooking potentially hazardous foods to the required temperatures.  Improper sanitization dishes, utensils and
hazardous foods to the required temperatures.  Improper sanitization dishes, utensils and equipment are not subjected to adequate tempera tures or chemicals to destroy microorganisms. Microorganisms, chemicals and foreign matter are allowed to contaminate food by  Poor personal hygiene food workers do not wash their hands before handling food and food related equipment.  Ill food workers food workers allowed to work while suffering from illness that is transmissible through foods.  Crosscontamination allowing readytoeat foods to come into contact with raw foods or conta minated equipment.  Use of contaminated food or ingredient using shellfish from unapproved source or meat and meat products from uninspected or unreliable suppliers.  Storing acidic foods in metal con tainers storing barbecue sauce in galvanized containers. Seven Steps of HACCP The HACCP system as described by the International Association of Milk, Food and Environmental Sanitarians has a series of seven interrelated
Association of Milk, Food and Environmental Sanitarians has a series of seven interrelated steps 1 Identify hazards and assess their severity and risks The first step in this system is to review recipes to identify potentially hazardous foods or foods containing potentially hazardous ingredients, and set out the preparation process in a flow chart and identify the hazards that can occur at each step in the process. 2 Determine critical control point. The second step is to identify the critical control points, that is, those steps where action MUST be taken to prevent, reduce or eliminate a hazard. 3 Institute control measures and devise criteria to establish control. setting critical limits The third step is to determine the measures or the actions that are needed to prevent, reduce or elimi nate hazards that are anticipated. This is also called the critical limit. 4 Monitor critical conrol points The fourth step is to monitor what is being done at each critical control point to
conrol points The fourth step is to monitor what is being done at each critical control point to determine whether the hazards are controlled by the actions set up in the third step. HACCP FOOD PROTECTION SYSTEM 36 N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E 5 Take action whenever moni toring results indicate criteria are not met. The fifth step is to put in place immediate corrective action if the hazards are not controlled at the critical control points. 6 Verify that the system is working as planned. The sixth step is to review the system to ensure that it is working, that hazards are identified, correc tive actions are taken and that a safe food product is produced. 7 Record keeping. Record keeping is done to sup port and revise HACCP plans as necessary. The Food Flow Diagram The foodflow chart and an HACCP evaluation can be applied to any potentially hazardous food item or food containing potentially hazardous ingredients. The critical
potentially hazardous food item or food containing potentially hazardous ingredients. The critical control points will vary in foods depending on the ingredients, method of preparation and whether served hot or cold. The following diagrams illustrate the process generally involved in the preparation of fried chicken and tuna salad. see next page. This system is an invaluable tool when there is cooperation between management and staff. Appropriate equipment must be provided in sufficient quantities and workers properly trained in their use. Staff must be trained to identify hazards and be provided with written proce dures on how to prevent, reduce or eliminate them. These procedures must be reviewed periodically and updated when changes are necessary. Inspectors from the Department of Health and Mental Hygiene are familiar with this food safety system and are willing to provide guidance. QUICK REVIEW 1. HACCP is an acronym that stands for     . 2. What are the seven principles of HACCP
QUICK REVIEW 1. HACCP is an acronym that stands for     . 2. What are the seven principles of HACCP , , , , , , . 3. HACCP is a system of  4. What hazard is HACCP mostly concerned with  Physical  Chemical  Biological 5. What is a Critical Control Point CCP  6. If potentially hazardous foods are left in the Temperature Danger Zone for more than two hours, what corrective action should be taken  7. Potentially hazardous foods in the refrigerator storage must be discarded when the temperature reaches F 8. When making cold salads such as tuna, it is recommended that ingredients be prechilled.  TRUE  FALSE 9. Foods can be kept uncovered during the cooling step  TRUE  FALSE fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L 37 fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E Process Hazards CCP Criteria for control Monitoring procedure Action when criteria not met Receiving Unapproved source No
for control Monitoring procedure Action when criteria not met Receiving Unapproved source No Inspect source. Check inspection stamp. Return to supplier or discard. Salmonella contamination Temperature 41F. Measure temperature. Out of temperature No foreign matter. Inspect for spoilage. Storage Insufficient refrigeration space No Check food and Place thermometer in Provide more refrigeration Improper equipment temperature refrigerator refrigerated equipment space and efficient units Raw stored over cooked temperatures Check food temperature Discard food if temp. 41F Store cooked over raw Date products for  2 hours Practice FIFO Observe storage practices or at 70F or higher Preparation Too much out at one time No Practice batch preparation Maintain food 41F Discard food if temp. 41F Use of contaminated equipment Use sanitized equipment Ensure amount of food out for more than 2 hours can be processed 4 hours, discard Small portions of meat and shallow containers Reheating Improper
can be processed 4 hours, discard Small portions of meat and shallow containers Reheating Improper equipment Yes Reheat to 165F Check food temperature If less than 165F Slow reheating within 2 hours every hour continue reheating Food in temperature danger zone Use stove or oven Process Hazards CCP Criteria for control Monitoring procedure Action when criteria not met Receiving Unapproved source No Inspect source Check cans for defects Return to supplier or discard Cans of tuna and Defective cans No home canned products jars of mayonnaise Home prepared Storage Under sewer lines No In storage area away Observe storage Discard from sewer lines Preparation Not using prechilled ingredients Yes No bare hand contact Maintain food 41F Discard food if Mixing with bare hands Ill workers not working Use prechilled ingredients temp. 41F more than 2 hours Ill food workers Cold food at 41F or below Sanitize equipmentutensils or at 70F or higher Use of contaminated equipment Equipmentutensils
Sanitize equipmentutensils or at 70F or higher Use of contaminated equipment Equipmentutensils sanitized Use of gloves or utensils Direct hand contact with Observe hand washing technique ready to eat food Observe workers health Ill worker is working Equipmentutensils contaminated Cold holding Food not held at 41F Yes Food temp. 41F Measure food temperature Discard food if Same day service Ineffective refrigeration equipment Effective refrigeration equipment during holding every hour temp. 41F more than 2 hours Patron contamination Sneeze guards and utensils or at 70F or higher Food Flow DiagramTuna Salad Food Flow DiagramFried Chicken P est control is a major concern for the operator of a food ser vice establishment. This section reviews the type of pests and the means to control them. Flies The flying insects in the restau rant industry include the house fly and the fruit fly. The house fly poses the gravest risk to food safety among all of the pests. Several species of house flies
fly poses the gravest risk to food safety among all of the pests. Several species of house flies are categorized as patho genic or diseasecausing flies, because they have been proven to carry shigella, salmonella, e. coli and other microorganisms that cause food borne illness. Common house flies are also called filth flies, as most of their time is spent in or around filth, including human and animal feces. As these flies walk around this filth, the hair on the body and the legs of the fly picks up the fecal matter along with the harmful microorganisms. Since flies cannot chew the food, they regurgitate or throwup on the food to dissolve or soften it before eating again. It is estimated that one live fly may carry as many as 28 million bacteria on its body alone, and another 5 million inside. Since the filth fly can travel to all areas of a food establishment relatively quickly and easily, it has the poten tial to contaminate many foods, food areas and food contact surfaces. Flies
it has the poten tial to contaminate many foods, food areas and food contact surfaces. Flies Life cycle The life cycle of a house fly con sists of four stages egg, larva, pupa and adult. The female of the species can be seen depositing their eggs on suitable breeding materials. Often, the females can be seen in clusters of up to 50 individuals. The female house fly lays individual eggs that pile up in masses of 75 to 150 eggs in her lifetime, a single female house fly may lay up to 900 eggs. In warm weather, the white pupae or maggots emerge from their eggs in 8 to 20 hours. This larva goes through three stages of development. The total development may take one week or less during warmer seasons, but up to eight weeks during cooler times. The house fly maggot and eggs depend on damp organic mate rial in which to develop and feed. When it has completed its last stage, the fly maggot will move to a cool dry area in which to pupate. They have been known to travel over 100 feet to locate
move to a cool dry area in which to pupate. They have been known to travel over 100 feet to locate a suitable place to pupate. The pupa transforms into an adult in as little as 3 days or as long as 5 weeks. This pupation period varies with temperature and humidity. Flies Habitat House flies prefer decaying organic materials, such as garbage, animal feces or a mixture of soil and garbage on which to lay eggs. Good sanitation and refuse management are the most basic and critical step to managing these pests as this will decrease food and breeding sites. The facility areas where wastes are accumulated, dumpsters, etc. must be cleaned regularly. Trash recepta cles need regular washing as flies may find ample breeding media stuck to the sides and bottom of empty containers. Another good reason sanitation helps manage flies is that fourth stage larva typically leave their breeding area and move away to some distance before they pupate. This behavior removes them from the obvious breeding
move away to some distance before they pupate. This behavior removes them from the obvious breeding zones, into less obvious hiding places for safe pupation. Therefore, frequent and thorough cleaning is an extremely important fly manage ment tool. Flies Control  Verminproof facility. Screen windows, roof vents and other openings with 18 mesh screens. Doors should be selfclosing. The back doors or delivery entrances, if present, must have a screened doors.  Drain Cleaning. It is important to realize that food establishments can become breeding grounds for the house flies, especially in cold er months. Drains should be free of any buildup that can attract or provide breeding grounds. We must recognize the importance of humid ity and warm temperatures for flies growth. Ensuring that there are no damp areas in a food facility, and improving drainage will often aid fly management. The floor drains, especially clogged drains, can pro vide an excellent damp environ ment for the flies to
drains, especially clogged drains, can pro vide an excellent damp environ ment for the flies to breed in. The fly breeding areas can be eliminated by keeping all drains clear and through regular sanitation.  Fly traps. Traps can be an addi tional management tool to pre vent solitary flies from wandering in and contaminating food areas.  Electric fly traps. There are two kinds of electric fly traps. Both kinds of traps use ultra violet light to attract flies. However, one 38 N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E PEST CONTROL fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L 39 fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E electrocutes the fly through the use of electric grid, fly zapper, whereas the other merely stuns and traps the fly in a glue trap affixed to the bottom of the trap fly catcher. The use of fly zappers in a food establishment is
affixed to the bottom of the trap fly catcher. The use of fly zappers in a food establishment is a very high risk activity and prohibited, because when the flies are electrocuted, the fly parts can become airborne and fall on exposed food or food areas. The use of fly catcher on the other hands is relatively safe as the flies are merely stunned and trapped on the glue trap that can be replaced from time to time.  Trap placement. Proper trap placement is extremely impor tant. Whenever using traps out doors, they should be placed strategically to attract flies away from the facility. When installed inside, install them so that they cannot be seen from the outside. If the flies can see these traps from outside, theyll be automati cally attracted to the food facility.  Poisonous baits. The use of poi sonous fly baits can be extremely dangerous in a food establishment. This product can only be used by a licensed pest control officer. Although these are able to rapidly kill a large number
be used by a licensed pest control officer. Although these are able to rapidly kill a large number of flies, their effectiveness may be shortlived. Work closely with your PCO as these applications inside the facility require special care. Remove or cover all food and ingredients. Cover food contact surfaces before application. Food contact surfaces may have to be cleaned prior to facility start up.  Air curtains. Air curtains, depend ing on the season, are simply a blast of steady cold or hot air that flows from a device installed above doorways. Originally designed to cut down on energy costs, these can prove to be effective against flying insects of all sorts, as the flying insects cannot pass through the air barrier. When placed and used correctly, in addition to fly ing insects, these can also be effective in keeping out dust and hot or cold air from outside. Fruit Flies Fruit flies are very small flies that measure about 18 inch in length. The red eyes of the fruit fly are key
are very small flies that measure about 18 inch in length. The red eyes of the fruit fly are key identifying characteristics. The head and thorax are tan in color with the abdomen somewhat darker. The fruit fly breeds in as well as feeds on overripe fruits and vegetables, as well as moist, decay ing organic matter. As the name implies, fruit flies generally tend to be a nuisance when fruits and vegetables are improperly stored or allowed to decay. Garbage that contains fruit peels also will be a frequent target of these flies. When searching for fruit fly breeding sources, look for the decaying moist organic matter. Some of the obvious places to check are fruits or vegetables that are decaying or are stored outside of refrigerators. Other areas to inspect include garbage cans, underneath and behind low laying kitchen equipment. In food service estab lishments, even small amounts of organic matter can often be found where the equipment legs, tables or cabinets touch the floor. These
matter can often be found where the equipment legs, tables or cabinets touch the floor. These tiny spaces can harbor thousands of fly larvae. All small cracks and crevices at floor level need to be inspected and thoroughly cleaned. Once, one of the breeding sources has been located, continue to look for more. Fruit flies easily follow air currents and usually have several breeding places in any struc ture. Keep an eye on outside envi ronment as fruit flies will also come in from nearby dumpsters, outdoor garbage cans or even damp compost piles where fruits and vegetables are disposed. Fruit fly larvae living in fruit which is eaten can cause intestinal discomfort and diarrhea. Fruit Flies Control Good housekeeping and a good sanitation program will be highly effective in the long term elimina tion of this annoying pest. By removing the breeding areas, taking care of the trash, and ensuring proper storage of fruits and vegeta bles, this problem can be easily eliminated. Cockroaches The
proper storage of fruits and vegeta bles, this problem can be easily eliminated. Cockroaches The presence of roaches in food establishments is a serious public health problem. Roaches carry disease causing bacteria on their bodies and deposit them on the food through their excreta and body contact. They have been linked to allergies in humans and many people with asthma are allergic to roach dust  roach body parts and roach droppings. Roach dust is a very strong asthma trigger. There are two main types of cock roaches in NYC German cockroach and American cockroach. German cockroach Adult German cockroaches are light brown except for the shield 40 N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E behind the head marked with two dark stripes, which run lengthwise on the body. Young roaches are wingless and nearly black with a single light stripe running down the middle of the back, and the adults are about 58 inch long. Egg capsules are light tan in
down the middle of the back, and the adults are about 58 inch long. Egg capsules are light tan in color and usually yield about 36 baby cockroaches. German cockroaches are the most common roaches found in houses and restaurants. Most cockroaches have a flattened, oval shape, spiny legs, and long, filamentous anten nae. Immature roaches are smaller, have undeveloped wings and resem ble the adults. They eat food of all kinds and may hitchhike into the food service establishments on egg cartons, soft drink cartons, sacks of potatoes or onions, used furniture or appliances, beer cases, etc. Once they find their way into the food establishments, German roaches generally develop their population in kitchens and bathrooms. During the day, these roaches may be found hiding behind baseboard moldings, in cracks around cabinets, drawers or pantries, and in and under stoves, microwave ovens, refrigerators, dish washers, and other restaurant equip ment. The presence of German roaches during the
dish washers, and other restaurant equip ment. The presence of German roaches during the daytime is usually an indication of a severe roach infestation. Most roaches like to live very near to the food and water source. German cockroach females, unlike the American roaches, carry the egg capsule protruding from their abdomen until the eggs are about to hatch. During the last three or four days prior to dropping her egg case, the female German cock roach does not seek any food or water. The case is then placed in a secluded location, with the nymphs emerging sometimes within the hour or as long as a week. A female may produce four to six cases dur ing her lifetime, each containing 30 to 50 eggs. Eggs hatch in 28 to 30 days, and nymphs develop in 40 to 125 days. Female roaches live about 200 days, with males living not quite as long. American Cockroach Adult American cockroaches are 1 and 12 inches long 38mm, mak ing them the largest of the house infesting cockroaches. With reddish
and 12 inches long 38mm, mak ing them the largest of the house infesting cockroaches. With reddish brown, fully developed wings, the American cockroaches have a yel lowish margin on the thorax or body region behind the head. When disturbed, they may run rapidly and adults may fly. Immature cock roaches resemble adults except that they are wingless. American cockroaches generally live in moist areas. They prefer warm temperatures around 85F and do not tolerate cold tempera tures. In food establishments, these cockroaches live in basements, around pipes and sewers, and may move outdoors into yards during warm weather. These cockroaches are common in basements, crawl spaces, cracks and crevices of porches, foundations, and walkways adjacent to buildings. Because of their fond ness for sewers, large populations of American cockroaches will be seen in many cities after heavy rains or flooding. Due to the large size and slow development of American cockroaches, large infestations of these
Due to the large size and slow development of American cockroaches, large infestations of these insects are not common with in food establishments. However, during certain times of the year, these cockroaches may move inside food establishments from outside sources. For example, in winter these cockroaches may move indoors, seeking warmer tempera tures and food. Cockroaches may enter food establishment through sewer connections, under doors, around utility pipes, air ducts, or other openings in the foundation. Cockroaches Control It is difficult to prevent the inva sion of a food establishment with insects, especially roaches that may come from an adjoining building or in packages delivered to the premis es. The emphasis must be placed on elimination of harborage and breed ing places within the establishment as well as extermination. All cracks and holes in the floor, walls and ceilings should be elimi nated by filling with cement, plaster, putty or plastic wood. Seams in fix tures
should be elimi nated by filling with cement, plaster, putty or plastic wood. Seams in fix tures and equipment should receive the same treatment. Equipment and fixtures should be placed flush against the wall and floor if not, then a sufficient dis tance away from the wall and above the floor to facilitate cleaning around it. All potential insectbreeding places, such as rubbish, debris and stagnant water, should be eliminat ed. Garbage should be kept in tight ly covered metal cans, and the cans should be thoroughly cleaned after being emptied. The room, in which garbage is kept, prior to removal, should be constructed of impervi ous washable material, preferably cement, and should have facilities to wash garbage cans. If this room can be refrigerated, the cold temperature will prevent insects from breeding, and odors from decomposing garbage will be reduced. Sanitation and good housekeep ing are very important factors in insect control. The food establish ment and equipment therein
ing are very important factors in insect control. The food establish ment and equipment therein should be completely cleaned each night before closing, not only for good sanitation, but to remove all grease, food encrustation, and food particles on which the insects can feed. In addition, roaches can be destroyed with effective insecticides applied by a licensed pest control operator. fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L 41 fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E Pesticide Use. Operators of food service establishments must ensure that the establishment remains free of pests and must use the methods described in the sections above to prevent pest infestation. Additionally, they may use glue traps and baited traps. However, they may not use chemical pesticides of any kind in the establishment, unless they also possess certification as a commercial applicator. This applies
the establishment, unless they also possess certification as a commercial applicator. This applies even to aerosol cans of pesticides, available at most grocery stores. Cockroaches and Allergies. Cockroaches, particularly German cockroaches, have been identified as the most common source of cock roach allergy in the USA. There are close to a dozen proteins linked to cast skins, droppings or frass or whole bodies that can cause allergies in humans. The allergens are heat stable. One study showed that 40 60 of people with asthma also have a serious allergy to cockroaches. Norway Rat The Norway rat rattus norvegi cus, the most common rodent in New York City, is a burrowing mammal. A burrow is a hole or tun nel dug into the ground by the rodent to create a space suitable for habitation. This small mammal is not indigenous to the United States, but is believed to have come on the ships from Central Asia around 1700s. Adult Norway rats weigh an average of about 1 pound. Their fur is coarse
Central Asia around 1700s. Adult Norway rats weigh an average of about 1 pound. Their fur is coarse and the upper body is usu ally brownish or reddishgray, while the belly is whitishgray. Blackish rats may also be present in some locations. Norway Rat Habitat The Norway rats live closely with people. They make their nests by burrowing in the ground. Their burrows can usually be found in parks or near vegetation, under buildings and other structures, beneath concrete slabs, along stream banks, in garbage dumps, and at other locations where suitable food, water, and shelter are present. They may also make their burrows beneath sidewalks and along the building foundations. Additionally, an unkempt open space with clutter may also encourage rats to make their burrows. However being opportunistic, they will also make their nests in between walls, and other open spaces. The rat burrows are typically located within 25 to 125 feet radius of the food source. Most rats remain in and around the
located within 25 to 125 feet radius of the food source. Most rats remain in and around the food establishments and yards which pro vide their necessities, and unless they are disturbed, they do not move to greater distances. Norway Rat Habits Norway rats can and will eat pretty much any food. However, when given a choice, they select a nutritionally balanced diet. Their preferable diet includes meats, fish, grains, nuts and cereals. Water is essential for their survival and they require about  to 1 ounce of water daily. The water require ment, however, is dependant on the type of food being consumed. Moist foods, whenever available, will lower their water need. They can easily detect stale and contaminated foods, and often choose fresh items over contaminated ones. Tip Pay close attention to garbage as it offers a very balanced diet and also satisfies their water needs. A typical city rat living outdoors has a maximum life span of about one year. In captivity, they may live for up to
living outdoors has a maximum life span of about one year. In captivity, they may live for up to 3 years. The total time for gestation is roughly 21 to 22 days and litters of 8 to 12 pups are born. Newborn pups grow rapidly. They can eat solid food when theyre 2 to 3 weeks old. They become com pletely independent at about 3 to 4 weeks and become sexually active at 3 months of age, sometimes as early as 8 weeks. Female Norway rats may come into heat every 4 or 5 days, and they may mate within a day after a litter is born. The average female rat has 4 to 7 litters per year and may reproduce as many as 60 to 70 or more offspring annually. Even though most of these pups will not survive, but on average, about 20 or so are successfully weaned. Like most rodents, Norway rats are nocturnal. They usually become active at night, when they start looking for food and water. However, rats may become active at day time when rat population is high their nests are disturbed due to rain or
may become active at day time when rat population is high their nests are disturbed due to rain or construction, or when they are starving. Rats do not see the same way as we do. They have poor eyesight and cannot see beyond 23 feet. Theyre also color blind. However, their other senses are more acute and they depend more on their hearing and their excellent senses of smell, taste and touch. Norway rats are very sensitive to motion up to 3050 feet away. Rats use their sense of smell to locate food items and apparently to recognize other rats. An average rat urinates over 100 times a night and each micro droplet of urine con tains various markers or messages. In this manner, the Norway rats, relying on their sense of smell, can recognize pathways, locate foods from previous excursions, members of the opposite sex who are ready to mate, and differentiate between members of their own colonies and strangers from other rat colonies. Norway rats use hearing to locate objects to within a few
and strangers from other rat colonies. Norway rats use hearing to locate objects to within a few inches. This highly developed sense combined with their touch sensitivity can pin point the location of the object to within six inches. Norway rats have a highly developed sense of touch due to very sensitive body hairs and whiskers which they use to explore their environment. Rats feel very much at home in food service establishments due to the familiarity with the areas. Their movement in an area relies heavily on their senses of touch and smell to direct it through movements learned by exploration and knowl edge of its terrain. Rodents, due to their poor vision, also like to rub their bodies against a wall when moving from one loca tion to another. This fact can aid in designing control of this pest, as the grease tracks can be located along floorwall junctions. Their sense of taste is also highly developed and they can detect impurities or conta minants in the food quite easily. This
highly developed and they can detect impurities or conta minants in the food quite easily. This fact must be kept in mind when selecting appropriate baits. House Mouse The house mouse mus musculus is a small and slender rodent. When fully grown, an adult mouse weighs about 2  5 ounces. The fur of a house mouse is generally grayish brown. This mammal lives very closely with the humans. House Mouse Habitat The house mouse lives in and around food service establishments, homes, as well as in any cluttered locations. They are capable of living outdoors, however they must seek shelter indoors when cold weather arrives. They prefer seeds and grains, although may eat a variety of differ ent foods. These are very curious mammals and are not hesitant to sample a different variety of food items. They are considered nibblers as they nibble on every food in their path, thus leading to the contami nation and destruction of many food items. A mouse only needs 23 grams of food daily and can survive
and destruction of many food items. A mouse only needs 23 grams of food daily and can survive on very little of water as most of the water is derived from the food it eats. Like the rats, house mice are also nocturnal. However, its not uncom mon to see them foraging during the day time. Their appearance during the day time does not necessarily indicate an infestation. Like the rats, mice also have poor eyesight, and depend more on their senses of smell, taste and touch. When shelter inside the food establishment becomes scarce, house mice can also dig and may burrow into the ground, in yards or around building structures. Typically, a nest consists of fibrous material in the shape of a ball. These nests are usually 4 to 6 inches in diameter. Litters of 4 or 6 are born 19 to 21 days after mating. They grow rapidly and after 2 to 3 weeks, they begin to make short trips from the nest and start eating solid food. Mice are sexually mature as early as when they are 6 to 10 weeks old. Mice
start eating solid food. Mice are sexually mature as early as when they are 6 to 10 weeks old. Mice may breed yearround and a female may have 5 to 10 litters per year. Mouse populations can there fore grow rapidly under good conditions. 42 N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L 43 fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E Typically, a mouse normally trav els no more than 1030 feet from its nest to the source of food. They do not compete well with rats and therefore, are not likely to be pre sent in areas frequented by rats. If a food establishment has a rat prob lem in the basement, it is unlikely that a mouse problem will also exist in the basement. They are more likely to occupy the kitchen on the first floor, living in spaces between walls and baseboards. One area that is constantly over
on the first floor, living in spaces between walls and baseboards. One area that is constantly over looked when rodent survey is con ducted is the drop ceiling. The ceil ing with its insulation provides an ideal nesting area for colonies of mice. A mouse constantly explores its environment, memorizing the locations of pathways, obstacles, food and water, shelter and other elements in their domain. They quickly detect new objects in their environment, but they do not fear new objects. Rodent Control Integrated Pest Management IPM The Integrated Pest Management IPM is a system that combines preventive and control measures to eliminate pest infestations. Each year millions of dollars are spent on costly and dangerous pesticides to combat rodent infestations which can also expose humans as well as pets to these poisonous substances. The IPM system combats the rodent problem by using a combination of different techniques, thus reducing exposure to dangerous chemicals. Integrated Pest
combination of different techniques, thus reducing exposure to dangerous chemicals. Integrated Pest Management works on three principles Starve them Build them out Destroy them However, for IPM to be successful, the key support principle is the thorough inspection of the facilities to identify the problem. A thorough inspection of your facility will give you a better indication of the nature and the severity of the infestation, as well as the common routes taken by the rodents. This will allow you or the licensed pest control officer to set up proper traps and baits to intercept them. There are a lot of signs that could indicate the nature and severity of the problem. These include  Rodent droppings. The physical state of the droppings may or may not indicate recent or old infestation. Soft, moist droppings usually indicate live rodent activi ty, while hard and dry ones indi cate old. However, this may not work all the time. The location of the droppings, whether in dark corner or
However, this may not work all the time. The location of the droppings, whether in dark corner or near an area with plenty of sunlight or heat may affect the appearance of scat. Amount of droppings indicate heavy or light infestation. The size of pellets will show if the rodents are large or small and if different sizes are present, it indicates litters of young are being reared.  Gnawing. Rodents spend about two percent of their life gnawing on various materials. This is done to grind down the front gnawing teeth that constantly grow.  Rodent Run. Rat runs are diffi cult to tell by appearance if they are new or old. Use white chalk or paint on suspected rat runs. The rodents are creatures of habit and will continue to use the same pipe or beam or floorwall junc tion. It will leave marks caused by dirt or grease on feet or fur.  Other signs include burrows, run ways, rodent odors, urine stains, rodent sounds, and live or dead rodents. Starve Them The main purpose of rodents entry in a
stains, rodent sounds, and live or dead rodents. Starve Them The main purpose of rodents entry in a food establishment is to seek food and water. There are many sources of food in a food establish ment and by depriving rodents of food and water we can significantly reduce their population. The food storage containers must be made of material that is impervi ous to rodent gnawing. Food con tainers made of metal, glass or smooth hard plastic is ideal for storage of food items. There are many opportunities for food particles to spill over on to the floors, behind equipment and other hard to reach places during a nor mal workday in a typical food estab lishment. Every effort must be made to pick up spilledover food to ensure that rodents will not have a steady supply of food. Rats need water for survival eliminating any standing water and other sources of water will also help control their popula tions. Improperly stored garbage also provides a steady source of food for rodents. All
popula tions. Improperly stored garbage also provides a steady source of food for rodents. All garbage containers must be made of metal or hard smooth plas tic with tight fitting lids. Garbage removal must be done on a daily basis. Mice need even smaller amounts of food and very little water to sur vive. They can acquire most of the water from the food. Although it is difficult to completely eliminate all food. However, an abundant supply of food will certainly lead to a big ger infestation. Build them out One of the reasons rodents exist in buildings is because of favorable conditions that permit them to hide, nest and breed. They will not remain where safe shelter or food is unavailable. To combat infestation in your premises, it is necessary to be able to recognize rodent harborage or hiding places, both actual and potential as they are the conditions favoring rodent life and propagation. There are three general types of rodent harborage  Temporary  Incidental  Structural Temporary
There are three general types of rodent harborage  Temporary  Incidental  Structural Temporary Rodent Harborage These are conditions arising out of failure to maintain premises in a clean and sanitary condition, or faulty methods of operation, house keeping or storage of stock. Examples of temporary rodent harborage include  Mass storage of office supplies and old records, materials for repairs, food products or other store mer chandise boxes, crates, or cartons that are left undisturbed for peri ods of time and not rotated in use using up older stock first.  Unused or obsolete fixtures or equipment, especially those hav ing drawers, compartments or other hollow enclosures.  Miscellaneous junk, trash, odds and ends placed in closets, cellars, boiler rooms or outoftheway places, or portions of premises not in daily use having very little or no light.  Garbage cans left uncovered overnight or having poorly fitting covers or in a defective, leaking condition.  Passageways used in
or having poorly fitting covers or in a defective, leaking condition.  Passageways used in transporting or storing garbage cans for removal, with spilled particles of food on floors, especially in corners.  Accumulations of rubbish at bot tom of airshafts, dumbwaiters or elevator shaft pits, under sidewalk or cellar window gratings or other parts of premises not cleaned regularly. Methods to prevent temporary rodent harborage include  Unused materials should be stored neatly and away from walls, allow ing enough space for an individual to pass through during cleaning and should preferably be stored sufficiently high above the floor to permit cleaning underneath. The amount stored should be mini mized as much as possible, and it should be disturbed or its position changed at least every three weeks to prevent nesting of rodents.  Avoid mass storage by arranging in rows with 2 wide aisles. If stock is placed on shelves, raise the lowest shelf about 6 to 8 above the floor.  Promptly
If stock is placed on shelves, raise the lowest shelf about 6 to 8 above the floor.  Promptly clean up food scraps that spill from garbage cans or fall under or behind slop sinks, equipment and stock bins. Rodents feed more readily on these than on bagged or packaged food supplies. Store all garbage in nonleaking metal receptacles with tightfitting lids.  Place soiled linen into suitable containers. Maintain clean and sanitary conditions at all times. Incidental Rodent Harborage These are conditions arising from installation of fixtures or equipment incidental to their use on the premises, in such a manner that hollow spaces, enclosures, and inac cessible places are formed. Examples of incidental rodent harborage include  Fixtures, refrigerators, ovens, etc. not installed flush against walls but leaving a small space that is too narrow for proper inspection and cleaning.  Narrow spaces left between bot toms of counters, or other fix tures or equipment and the floor.  Small spaces
left between bot toms of counters, or other fix tures or equipment and the floor.  Small spaces existing between ceilings and tops of fixtures, clothes lockers, refrigerators, clos ets and cabinets, large overhead pipes and ventilating ducts sus pended a few inches from ceiling.  Hollow partitions double wall space.  Hollow furniture or fixtures with inaccessible enclosures.  Boxedin casings or sheathing around pillars, pipes, radiators, etc. forming hollow enclosures.  Bottom shelves, stock platforms or skids that are not set directly on the floor but allow a space of a few inches to exist underneath.  Defective insulated sections of large refrigerators or pipe coverings hollow enclosed spaces formed by damage to cork or asbestos.  Loose foods stored in low, thin, wooden food bins, boxes, cartons, burlap bags, etc.  Partially enclosed spaces behind open metal grills used on housing of motors or other mechanical equipment. Methods to prevent incidental rodent harborage include
of motors or other mechanical equipment. Methods to prevent incidental rodent harborage include  Eliminate narrow, inaccessible spaces behind fixtures or equip ment by placing flush against wall or leaving a space wide enough for inspection and cleaning.  Solidly block out narrow spaces underneath, or install flush on floors or raise high enough for cleaning.  Avoid providing undisturbed rat runways in narrow space between ducts or long hoods and the ceil ing. Ducts should be placed flush against ceilings and preferably be round in shape, instead of square. 44 N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L 45 fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E  Remove decorative boxingin around radiators, columns, etc. to avoid hollow enclosures, or protect with metal flashing extending at least 6 above the
etc. to avoid hollow enclosures, or protect with metal flashing extending at least 6 above the floors.  Repair and securely close all breaks in insulation around pipes, refrigerators or cooling cabinets.  Line interiors of wooden bins with sheet metal, or store foods in rodentproof containers.  Eliminate hollow spaces formed by false bottoms in counters, lockers, cabinets, etc.  Alter hollow fixtures so that enclo sures are exposed for easy cleaning. Structural Rodent Harborage These conditions are due to design or construction of a building that are defective from a rodent proof standpoint or that developed during occupancy from failure to make proper repairs or to use rodentproof materials. Examples of structural rodent harborage include  Openings made in outside building walls, around beams, or in interior walls, floors or ceiling for installa tion of pipes, cables or conduits. They are made by plumbers, elec tricians or other workmen. The openings are usually larger than necessary
made by plumbers, elec tricians or other workmen. The openings are usually larger than necessary and the unused por tions of holes are not closed up. Holes, large cracks, loose bricks or other openings in floors, walls or ceilings are other examples.  Hollow spaces in double walls, between floor and ceiling of lower story, and in double ceilings of cellars.  Enclosed hollow spaces formed by sheathing the undersides of stairways, by installation of false floors in toilets, or by raised wooden floors over earthen floors of cellars.  Entrance and cellar doors that are not tightfitting or not provided with a proper door sill or saddle, permitting openings over 14 to exist and not protected around gnawing edges with metal flash ing at least 6 above floor level.  Openings around ceiling or floor beams, or risers, where they pass through partitions.  Openings of fans, ventilators, and louvers on the outside of buildings, or fancy metal grills with openings over 14. Cellar floors of earth,
on the outside of buildings, or fancy metal grills with openings over 14. Cellar floors of earth, enabling rodents to burrow underneath. Methods to prevent structural rodent harborage include  Promptly seal up all holes or openings around pipe lines or cables where they enter the building, with concrete mortar or cement mortar to which ground glass may be added for better results.  Place tightfitting metal collars or flanges around pipes and risers. Provide escutcheon plates for all risers where they pass through floor slabs, unless same are water proof by pockets of mastic.  Seal up all openings around beams.  Avoid using doublewall type construction with hollow interior spaces, or hollow tile block, hol low cement block, or similar material for partitions or walls of storage compartments or in cellars.  Inspect all parts of premises for holes and seal every opening in walls and ceilings with cement plastered smooth. Move away fix tures and stock that may hide holes in floors and use
with cement plastered smooth. Move away fix tures and stock that may hide holes in floors and use a flashlight so as not to miss any. Look for loose bricks, cracks or other openings in cellar foundation walls. Find all openings before rodents do. Inspect regularly and repair weak spots before actual breaks occur.  Block out hollow spaces under raised wooden floors with con crete. Refrigerators, ranges, ovens, etc. should be solidly based on concrete. Protect entrance, cellar doors and windows with metal flashing around gnawing edges and maintain in good repair.  Replace earthen cellar floors with a floor of concrete at least 3 to 4 thick and tied securely into foundation walls.  Securely anchor window and door screens to the frames. Destroy Them The use of toxic pesticide in a food environment is a dangerous and risky process. This should only be used as a last resort and even then, only with the help of a licensed pest control officer. The New York City health Code makes it illegal
with the help of a licensed pest control officer. The New York City health Code makes it illegal to use pesticides in a food establishment unless used or applied by a licensed pest control applicator. Non toxic Control Traps Use of traps is advantageous for many reasons  Eliminates the exposure to harmful toxic substance  Easy to dispose the captured rodent  Results can be quantified  Prevents having to deal with odors from dead rodents in hard to reach places There are many types of traps, they include the following  Snap Traps. Among them, the most useful type of trap is the snap trap. However, for it to be effective, following guidelines should be useful 46 N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E  Use large number of traps at one time.  Do not set up traps for several days to allow rats to become acclimated with the traps, as rats are very skeptical of new things.  When ready to set the traps, use the mass trapping tech nique. In this
skeptical of new things.  When ready to set the traps, use the mass trapping tech nique. In this method, a large number of traps are set up at once so that a large number of rats can be caught before they become trapshy.  The type of baits used is also an important consideration. It is best to use food items that the rodents constantly go after in the food establishment as these foods are more desirable to rodents and also are part of their diet. However, foods high in protein also make good bait. The rodents, especially during the mating season, need a pro tein rich diet which is usually hard to get. Therefore, using peanut butter, cheese, ground meat or deli meats is usually found to be effective bait.  Stale bait must be replaced with fresh bait as rats can detect older foods and avoid it.  Live Traps. Live traps are large cages or boxes that have only one way entry. The rodents looking for food get trapped inside. Dubbed as a more humane method, a large number of rodents can be
for food get trapped inside. Dubbed as a more humane method, a large number of rodents can be caught at one time.  Glue boards.Contrary to the popular belief, the use of glue boards has the lowest success rate. Glue boards should only be used as part of the pest control survey. Typically, these traps end up catching baby mice and rat pups. This is because rodents whiskers or vibrissae are highly developed sensory devices and can usually detect the sticky substance on the glue traps and avoid it. The younger populations of rodents havent fully developed this sense, and hence get caught. Important note regarding the proper disposal of rodents when caught. Safety precautions must be taken to ensure personal safety of the person handling the dead rodents. For example, avoid han dling dead rodents with bare hands to prevent contact with diseased animals when cleaning rodent exc reta, spray the area with sanitizing solution prior to sweeping clean and sanitize any exposed food con tact
the area with sanitizing solution prior to sweeping clean and sanitize any exposed food con tact surfaces. Toxic Control Pesticides The use of pesticide in the food environment is a very dangerous and risky proposition. The New York City Health Code does not permit the use of pesticide in a commercial facility unless done by a licensed pest control officer. Therefore, it is important to obtain the services of a reputable pest control officer PCO. Be wary of PCOs that promise a quick fix. Dangers of Tracking Powder The use of rodenticide tracking powder is banned in a commercial food establishment. The rodenticide tracking powder has the same ingre dients as any other bait being used. However, because the ingredients are mixed with talcum powder or other similar powder carrier, the concentration of toxins are many times higher in some cases as high as 40 to 50 times. The tracking powder is not absorbed or inhaled by the rodent, rather, the powder sticks to the feet and the fur of the
is not absorbed or inhaled by the rodent, rather, the powder sticks to the feet and the fur of the rodent. As the rodent starts groom ing itself or others, it ingests the anticoagulant in the tracking powder and because the concentration is much higher, dies within a day or two. Pesticide Use in Food Service Operations Are you harming yourself, your employees, or your customers You may be without realizing it, if you are using pesticides improperly. You may also be breaking the law. New York State law requires that anyone using pesticides, except farmers or homeowners on their own property, be certified as a commercial applicator with the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation DEC. This applies even to aerosol cans of pesticides, available at most grocery stores. Persons applying pesticides in restaurants, institutional kitchens or other food service operations need special certification from DECs Bureau of Pesticides Management. All pesticides are toxic. After all,
certification from DECs Bureau of Pesticides Management. All pesticides are toxic. After all, their purpose is to kill roaches, rats and other pests. Proper use of pesti cides is essential to everyones safety. If pesticides are used improperly, food, utensils or other foodprepa ration equipment can become cont aminated. Improper handling of pesticides can also lead to direct expo sure through the nose, mouth or skin. The result may be future health prob lems for those exposed. Health Department Sanitarians check for proper labeling, storage and use of pesticides during routine inspec tions of food service establishments. fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L 47 fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E NEW SAFE AND EFFECTIVE PEST CONTROL REQUIRED The presence of insects and rodents or conditions that allow them to flourish, are among the most common violations cited during
or conditions that allow them to flourish, are among the most common violations cited during food service establishment inspections. Pests can contaminate food, making customers sick. The use of chemicals to control pests creates other problems pesticides can cling to surfaces and many are dangerous. To keep restaurants insect and rodentfree, the Health Code now requires establishments to 1. Clean up refuse and other material in or on which pests hide or nest. 2. Seal cracks, gaps or holes that permit easy movement of pests. 3. Eliminate water leaks, drips and standing water as these allow pests to thrive. 4. Install door sweeps or other barriers on doors leading to the outside. Any gap must be less than an eighth of an inch to prevent entry. 5. Throw out food garbage, clean food scraps and grease stains, and store food in containers that close tightly. 6. Inspect the premises and incoming packages each day for signs of pests. 7. Hire a pest management professional licensed by the New
packages each day for signs of pests. 7. Hire a pest management professional licensed by the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation DEC to examine the premises at least monthly. Keep records showing the professionals name, address, DEC license number, the services provided and the effective date of the contract. DO DONT Pesticides Dos and Donts DO be concerned about your health and safety, and that of your employees and customers. DO ask your pest controller for proof of certification by DECs Bureau of Pesticides Management. DO report uncertified pest controllers to a DEC pesticide inspector at the DEC Regional Office. DO make a pests life difficult by maintaining extraclean conditions and by eliminating possible pest entry routes. DONT hire an uncertified pest controller. DONT apply any pesticide in a food service operation yourself unless you are certified. DONT permit the application of pesticides while food is being prepared or served, or in an area where
permit the application of pesticides while food is being prepared or served, or in an area where utensils, unprotected food or containers are stored. For More Information To learn more about pest control, or for details on how to become certified to apply pesticides, contact the DEC regional pesticide office. RodentInsect Control Summary Control Rats and Mice  Get rid of their nesting places. Clean up all piles of rubbish, inside and outside the premises.  Build them out. Block all possi ble rat entrances. Ratproof foun dations.  Starve them out. Protect food at night. Keep garbage containers closed. Do a thorough cleanup job.  Kill them. Use traps for tempo rary control. Control Flies  Get rid of their breeding places. Control the sources.  Keep them out. Screen doors and windows properly. See that all doors open out and are selfclosing. Install overhead fly fans or air curtains.  Do a good job of housekeep ing. Keep foods covered. Keep garbage containers sealed. Remove food
Do a good job of housekeep ing. Keep foods covered. Keep garbage containers sealed. Remove food accumulations promptly.  Kill them. Hire a licensed pest control operator. Control Roaches and other insects  Be alert to first signs of infesta tion. Destroy contaminated foods.  Do a good job of housekeeping and storage. Keep foods covered. Keep garbage containers sealed. Re move food accumulations promptly.  Kill them. Hire a licensed pest control operator. Hand Washing Facilities Provide a separate hand washing sink, dispensed hand soap, hand drying device or disposable towels, and waste receptacle for each food preparation area, utensil washing area and toilet room. Handwash ing sinks must be located within 25 feet of each food preparation, food service and warewashing area, and in or adjacent to employee and patron bathrooms. The use of a common sink for food preparation or for washing equipment andor utensils as well for hand washing is not permitted. Each hand washing sink should
equipment andor utensils as well for hand washing is not permitted. Each hand washing sink should be provided with hot and cold running water preferably tempered by means of a mixing valve or a combination faucet. It is recommended that any selfclosing or metering faucet should be designed to provide a flow of water for at least 15 seconds without the need to reactivate the faucet. Determining Hot Water Supply Requirements The hot water supply should be sufficient to satisfy the continuous and peak hot water demands of the establishment. For purposes of esti mating the hot water generating capability, assume a supply tempera ture requirement of 115F to each fixture and 180F to mechanical dishwashing machines.  Hot water for hand washing should not exceed 115F.  Hot water for mechanical dish washers should be 140F165F for washing and 180F for sanitizing.  The water temperature for manual hot water sanitization should be at least 170F. Toilet Facilities Toilet facilities should be
hot water sanitization should be at least 170F. Toilet Facilities Toilet facilities should be installed according to local plumbing ordi nances. They should be conveniently located and should be accessible to employees andor patrons at all times. All food service establishments with a seating capacity of 20 or more except those in operation on or before December 5, 1977 must provide appropriately identified and main tained toilet facilities for their patrons. Suitable public notice of any such alternate facility must be conspicu ously posted within the food estab lishment. Employee toilet facilities may be used by patrons only if they do not pass through a food preparation or utensil washing area to access them and there are separate facilities for each sex. Toilet rooms should be completely enclosed and have tight fitting, self closing, solid doors. They should be vented to the outside by an opera ble, screened window or mechanical device. Fixtures should be designed to be easily
by an opera ble, screened window or mechanical device. Fixtures should be designed to be easily cleanable. Plumbing and Cross Connections Plumbing must be sized and installed according to applicable codes. There should be no cross connection between the potable water supply and any nonpotable or questionable water supply. Where nonpotable water sys tems are permitted for purposes such as air conditioning and fire protec tion, the nonpotable water must not contact food, potable water or equip ment that contacts food or utensils directly or indirectly. The piping of any nonpotable water system should be clearly identified so that it is readily distinguishable from piping that car ries potable water. Submerged Inlet Protection The potable water system must be installed to preclude the possibil ity of backflow. Devices should be installed and maintained to protect against backflow and back siphonage at all fixtures and equip ment unless an air gap is provided. The air gap, when used, must
at all fixtures and equip ment unless an air gap is provided. The air gap, when used, must be at least twice the diameter of the water supply inlet, but not less than 1, and exist between the water supply inlet and the fixtures floodlevel rim. 48 N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E P L U M B I N G QUICK REVIEW 1. Insecticides and rodenticides can only be applied in a restaurant by the supervisor of food operations  TRUE  FALSE 2. The best method of eliminating flies from an establishment is to use an electric fly trap.  TRUE  FALSE 3. List four potential sources of food for rodents , , , . 4. When food is unavailable to mice that have infested a restaurant, they will  5. The sighting of rodents during day time may be an indication of rat infestation  TRUE  FALSE 6. What are some of the signs of rodents or rodent infestation , , . 7. Fly strips are not useful in eliminating insect breeding places  TRUE  FALSE 8. Rats are known to enter
strips are not useful in eliminating insect breeding places  TRUE  FALSE 8. Rats are known to enter buildings through openings that are as small as . 9. In insect control, which measures are useful in keeping them out , , . 10. Fresh rat droppings in a food establishment is a critical violation  TRUE  FALSE fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L 49 fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E Vacuum breakers A primary concern for the safety of potable water is from crossconnections. A crossconnection is any connection between potable water supply and sewage, or other contaminated water. This connection allows backflow of contaminated water into potable water systems. In order to prevent against this type of contamination, a vacuum breaker must be installed. For instance, a cross connection is made when a hose is attached to a threaded hose bib, and the other end is left submerged
is made when a hose is attached to a threaded hose bib, and the other end is left submerged in a puddle of waste water. A hose bib vacuum breaker only allows water to flow from the potable water source and would prevent the backflow. The same cross connection may also exist between potable water supply and any kitchen equipment that is directly connected. For example, coffee machine, espresso, ice maker, dishwashers, potato peel ers, etc. An atmospheric vacuum breaker is needed to prevent conta mination from these equipment to back into potable water supply. Other fixtures and equipment requiring back siphonage protection include Water closets Hose connections Urinals Garbage grinders DrainsIndirect Waste There should be no direct connec tion between the sewage system and any drains originating from equipment in which food or food utensils are placed. An unobstructed vertical air space between the lowest opening of the fixture drain and the floodlevel rim of the receiving receptacle
between the lowest opening of the fixture drain and the floodlevel rim of the receiving receptacle or drain opening must be provided. The space must be twice the diameter of the discharge opening or 1 inch, whichever is greater. Unidirectional check valves or equivalent devices are not acceptable for this purpose. Indirect sewer connections should be located within 2 feet of the equipment which it is intended to protect and on the inlet side of the grease interceptor and p trap. Fixtures and equipment requiring indirect waste connections include Food preparation and ware washing sinks Refrigerators and freezers Ice makers and storage bins Steam tables and kettles Dipper wells. A grease interceptor should be installed in the waste line leading from pot sinks, floor drains receiving waste from soup or stock kettles, food scrap sinks, scullery sinks and the scraper section of commercial dishwashers to prevent grease from entering the drainage system. Interceptors should remove an average
to prevent grease from entering the drainage system. Interceptors should remove an average of at least 90 of the grease or other extractable matter in the waste water and should conform to the requirements of the NYC Dept. of Environmental Protection, Industrial Waste Control Section. Lighting Permanently fixed artificial light sources should be installed to pro vide at least 50 foot candles of light on all food preparation surfaces and at equipment or utensilwashing work levels. All other areas, includ ing dining areas during cleaning operations, should be provided with at least 20 foot candles at 30 inches from the floor. Shielding such as plastic shields, plastic sleeves with end caps, shatter proof bulbs andor other approved devices should be provided for all artificial lighting fixtures located over, by, or within food storage, preparation, service and display facilities. Sheilding should also be provided where utensils and equip ment are cleaned and stored, partic ularly where
should also be provided where utensils and equip ment are cleaned and stored, partic ularly where they may be exposed to extremes in temperature variation. Heat lamps, where used, should be protected against breakage by a shield surrounding and extending beyond the bulb, leaving only the face of the bulb exposed. GasFired Hot Water Heaters Gasfired hot water heaters produce carbon monoxide as a waste prod uct. This is an insidious gas that can Hose Bib Vacuum Breaker Atmospheric Vacuum Breaker Open Waste Indirect Waste Connections 50 N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E result in death when breathed, thus it is imperative that this gas be vented to the outside. Important considera tions when dealing with a gasfired hot water heater are  The vent pipe must be made of rigid material and installed at an upward slope then led to the out side air.  The gas flame should be properly adjusted so that it burns in a bluish color.  The heater must
The gas flame should be properly adjusted so that it burns in a bluish color.  The heater must be tested for back draft at the wind diverter. A severe back draft can extinguish the pilot light and cause an accu mulation of gas that can result in an explosion. Also, any blockage can also cause carbon monoxide to accumulate inside the facility. Ventilation All establishments shall be ade quately ventilated to prevent excessive heat, steam, condensation, vapors, odors, smoke and fumes. Ventilation to the outside air must comply with applicable law and regulation and must not create a nuisance or unlawful emission. Intake and exhaust ducts must be constructed and maintained to prevent dust, dirt or other conta minants from entering the establish ment. Mechanical ventilation must be installed in rooms where odors, vapors or fumes originate. Ventilation hoods and devices must be constructed and installed to prevent grease or con densation from collecting on walls or ceilings and from
and installed to prevent grease or con densation from collecting on walls or ceilings and from dripping into food or onto foodcontact surfaces. All hoods should meet NSF Standard 2 requirements and be designed, constructed and installed in conformance with the National Fire Protection Association Bulletin 96.  NOTE The installation and operation of ventilation systems is regulated by the NYC Department of Buildings, the NYC Fire Department and the NYC Department of Environmental Protection. For additional information regarding these installations and other requirements, includ ing ventilation hoods, ducts and fire suppression systems ANSUL, you should contact these agencies. Cooking equipment ventilation hoods and devices should be designed and installed to prevent grease or condensation from collecting on walls, ceilings, and fire suppression supply piping, and from dripping onto food or food contact surfaces. Makeup air intakes should be screened bird screen and filtered to prevent
or food contact surfaces. Makeup air intakes should be screened bird screen and filtered to prevent the entrance of dust, dirt, insects and other contaminating material. Where the introduction of makeup air will cause condensation, drafting or interfere with the exhaust or vapor capture efficiency of the hood, the makeup air should be tempered. A tempered makeup air system may be required if the exhaust is greater than 1,500 cfm. The installation of fire suppres sion system supply piping in the unfiltered air space in exhaust hoods should be limited to vertical runs to minimize grease collection. Exposed piping must be cleanable. Hot water sanitizing dishwashing machines should be provided with adequate ventilation, that is sized according to the manufacturers specifications. Utility Facility At least one utility sink or curbed cleaning facility with a floor drain should be provided for cleaning mops and for the disposal of mop water or similar liquid wastes. Storage The dry storage
cleaning mops and for the disposal of mop water or similar liquid wastes. Storage The dry storage space required depends upon the menu, number of meals, quantities purchased and frequency of delivery. Storage rooms should be located adjacent to food preparation areas and convenient to receiving. Ideally, the storage rooms should be free of uninsulated steam and water pipes, water heaters, trans formers, refrigeration condensing units, steam generators or other heat producing equipment. The area should be well ventilated and main tained at 50F to 70F. Shelving may be constructed of suitably finished wood but prefer ably of noncorrosive metal or plastic. Approved food containers with tight fitting covers and scoops should be used for storing and dispensing bulk items or broken lots. Food contain ers should not be stored under exposed or unprotected sewer lines. Items should be spaced from walls sufficiently and raised at least 6 inches above the floor to allow for adequate maintenance
walls sufficiently and raised at least 6 inches above the floor to allow for adequate maintenance and inspec tion of the facility. Facilities should be provided to store cleaned and sanitized utensils and equipment above the floor to protect them from splashing, dust, overhead plumbing or other conta mination. Poisonous and toxic materials should be stored in areas designated for such use and for no other pur pose, or in a storage area outside the food, equipment and utensil storage area. Bactericides and cleaning com pounds should never be stored with insecticides, rodenticides, or other poisonous materials. Insecticides and rodenticides should be kept in their original containers. Dressing Room and Lockers Rooms or areas separate from food preparation, storage or service areas, and separate from utensil washing or storage areas, should be fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L 51 fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E
U A L 51 fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E provided if employees will routinely change clothes within the establish ment. Lockers or other suitable storage facilities should be located in dress ing areas for employees to store their personal belongings. Garbage Storage Garbage and waste grease should be placed in durable, easily clean able, watertight, nonabsorbent, rodent and insectproof containers with tight fitting lids. An area for storage of these containers and facil ities for their cleaning should also be provided. QUICK REVIEW 1. What is the proper sequence for the manual dish washing operations , , , . 2. Bathrooms for patrons must be provided when there are 19 seats or more in the dining area.  TRUE  FALSE 3. Cutting boards must be sanitized at least three times a day  TRUE  FALSE 4. Carbon monoxide poisoning can result from a faulty gasfired hot water unit.  TRUE  FALSE
FALSE 4. Carbon monoxide poisoning can result from a faulty gasfired hot water unit.  TRUE  FALSE 5. Equipment, including ice makers and ice storage equipment, should not be located under exposed or unprotected sewer lines, open stairwells or other sources of contamination.  TRUE  FALSE 6. Bathrooms for employees must always be provided  TRUE  FALSE 7. Wiping cloths must be stored in a sanitizing solution with a strength of PPM 8. Between each use, cutting boards must be , , and . 9. Both employees and customers can use the same bathroom even if customers have to walk through food areas to gain access to it  TRUE  FALSE 10. When manually washing dishes using hot water sanitizing method, which of the following statements are true  A. The water must be at 170F.  B. An immersion basket is needed.  C. A burner or booster is needed to heat the water.  D. A twocompartment sink is necessary. 11. During chemical sanitization, the chemical solution must be checked by  . OPERATING A TEMPORARY
11. During chemical sanitization, the chemical solution must be checked by  . OPERATING A TEMPORARY FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT RULES AND GUIDELINES F oods must be obtained from approved sources that comply with all laws relating to food and food labeling. The use of food pre pared in any place that is not operated under the jurisdiction of an appro priate regulatory agency and that does not have a current permit or licence to operate, if required, from that agency, is prohibited.  The sale of shellfish oysters, clams or mussels from a pushcart or other vehicle in any street or public place is prohibited.  The preparation and service of potentially hazardous foods, including pastries filled with cream or synthetic cream, custards and similar products, and salads or sandwiches containing meat, poultry, eggs, shellfish or fish, is prohibited unless approved by the Department of Health. Only foods which require limited preparation, such as hamburgers and frankfurters, may be served.
Only foods which require limited preparation, such as hamburgers and frankfurters, may be served.  Vendors who intend to sell alco holic beverages must obtain a license from the New York State Liquor Authority.  Vendors must maintain their establishments, and prepare and store foods in accordance with the New York City Health Code and the New York State Sanitary Code.  Vendors must meet all other requirements, conform to all other applicable laws, obtain their Permit or Certificate of Registration prior to the event, and obtain a Food Protection Certificate, when required.  The Permit, Certificate of Registration, and the Food Protection Certificate must be conspicuously posted at the Temporary Food Service Establishment whenever it is in operation. Food protection Wash your hands before starting work and each time after contamina tion including coughing, sneezing or handling unclean items. Prepackaged moist towelettes containing alcohol as a base ingredient may be used to cleanse
items. Prepackaged moist towelettes containing alcohol as a base ingredient may be used to cleanse hands in nonprocessing establishments. Food Protection Certificate 52 N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E Wash your hands with soap and water after using the toilet.  Never allow hands to come in contact with food that will not be cooked. Use clean sanitized utensils, deli paper, disposable gloves, etc. Keep all foods covered or other wise protected from outside conta mination. Keep all food service equipment, utensils, and paper goods similarly protected from out side contamination. Use only single service dishes and utensils for service to patrons. Handle single service eating utensils in a manner that prevents contami nation of surfaces that come into contact with foods. Store all food, food service equip ment, utensils, and paper goods off the ground at all times. Do not prepare foods if you are ill or have cuts or infections on your
off the ground at all times. Do not prepare foods if you are ill or have cuts or infections on your hands. Do not smoke, eat or drink while working. Wear clean outer garments and effective hair restraints. Prepare foods as close to transporta tion or service time as possible. Cook  poultry to at least 165F for 15 seconds  pork or any food containing pork to at least 150F for 15 seconds  ground meats to 158F for 15 seconds  other foods to at least 140F  shell eggs or food containing shell eggs to at least 145F  rare roast beef andor rare beef steaks as per chart below Reheat potentially hazardous hot foods to at least 165F 73.9C. Stir with sanitized utensils. Maintain all potentially hazardous foods at 140F 60C or above. Maintain all potentially hazardous cold foods at 41F 5.C or below. Sanitize all food contact surfaces and equipment. Chemical sanitiza tion solution may be prepared by mixing one tablespoon of bleach with each gallon of cool, potable water. Do not add soap or detergent
one tablespoon of bleach with each gallon of cool, potable water. Do not add soap or detergent to the water, because they reduce the effec tiveness of the solution. Rinse wiping cloths frequently in the sanitizing solution. Structure and Equipment Ensure that the walls, base, floor and food contact surfaces are of san itary construction, and made of noncorrosive, nonrusting metals. Surfaces must be waterproof, smooth, readily cleanable and resistant to dents and scratches.  Provide proper waste receptacles. All waste receptacles must be vermin proof and provided with tightfitting lids.  Enclose or guard cooking and serv ing surfaces to provide protection against airborne contamination.  Prevent accidental injury by con tact with cooking devices. Shield cooking devices against possible contact with patrons.  R I G H T W R O N G Handling of Eating Utensils Temperature F C Time 130 54 112 Minutes 131 56 89 Minutes 133 57 42 Minutes 135 58 36 Minutes 136 59 28 Minutes 138 60 18 Minutes
Minutes 131 56 89 Minutes 133 57 42 Minutes 135 58 36 Minutes 136 59 28 Minutes 138 60 18 Minutes 140 61 12 Minutes 142 62 8 Minutes 145 63 4 Minutes fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L 53 fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E WARNING DRINKING ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES DURING PREGNANCY CAN CAUSE BIRTH DEFECTS NEW YORK CITY DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND MENTAL HYGIENE THE CITY COUNCIL Local Law 63 THE CITY OF NEW YORK DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND MENTAL HYGIENE Alcohol and Pregnancy. Post conspicuously. The following signs, produced by the Department of Health and Mental Hygiene, can be obtained from the Department of Consumer Affairs, 42 Broadway, NY, NY. Please visit on.nyc.govrestaurantsigns for a complete checklist of all the required New York City signs. REQUIRED POSTINGS SAMPLES Heimlich Maneuver. Post conspicuously. NYC Department of Health  Mental Hygiene The City Council Local
Maneuver. Post conspicuously. NYC Department of Health  Mental Hygiene The City Council Local Law 43 Obtain appropriate permits for the use of propane gas. Properly secure propane tanks. Tanks must be in an upright vertical position and provided with a base plate anchor as security against accidental toppling. The connection from fuel tank to burner must be of either a rigid metal tube or an approved, flexible metal tube connections at fuel tanks and burners must be free of leaks. Water requirements There are no sink or hot and cold water requirements for nonprocess ing establishments however, make available acceptable means of keeping hands clean e.g., moist towelettes.  Provide an adequate supply of potable drinkable water for food preparation, cleaning and sanitizing equipment, and hand washing in processing establishments. Place waste water in a leakproof container labeled waste water with a tightfitting lid. Dispose of waste water into a public system or a sewage disposal system
with a tightfitting lid. Dispose of waste water into a public system or a sewage disposal system constructed, maintained and operated according to the law. 54 N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E REQUIRED POSTINGS SAMPLES Sale of cigarettes, cigars, chewing tobacco, powdered tobacco, bidis, herbal cigarettes, or other tobacco products, rolling papers or pipes to persons under 18 years of age is PROHIBITED BY LAW. JONATHAN MINTZ Commissioner, Department of Consumer Affairs MARY T. BASSETT, MD, MPH Commissioner, Department of Health  Mental Hygiene City of New York BILL DE BLASIO, MAYOR If cigarettes are sold. Post conspicuously. Resuscitation masks and latex gloves are available at   Learn CPR. For information, contact the American Red Cross ALL EMPLOYEES MUST WASH HANDS  after using the toilet  before handling food  whenever they are soiled To report violations of the law, call 311 or visit www.nyc.govhealth For help quitting smoking,
To report violations of the law, call 311 or visit www.nyc.govhealth For help quitting smoking, call 311 No Smoking This is a smokefree establishment. NYC SmokeFree Air Act Local Law No. 47 of 2002 QUICK REVIEW 1. First Aid Choking poster must only be displayed conspicuously in each designated eating area  TRUE  FALSE 2. All food establishments must display an Alcohol and Pregnancy Warning sign.  TRUE  FALSE 3. A Wash Hands sign must be displayed at all hand washing sinks.  TRUE  FALSE The following signs can also be obtained from the Department of Consumer Affairs, 42 Broadway, NY, NY . Please visit on.nyc.govrestaurantsigns for a complete checklist of all the required New York City signs. fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L 55 fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E What is Reduced Oxygen Packaging ROP Reduced oxygen packaging ROP is a procedure that results in a
What is Reduced Oxygen Packaging ROP Reduced oxygen packaging ROP is a procedure that results in a reduced oxygen level in a sealed package. The air we breathe has approximately 21 oxygen and therefore any packaging option that results in less oxy gen is classified as ROP. Types of ROP Types of processes considered as ROP include Cook Chill Packaging, Sous Vide and Vacuum Packaging.  Cookchill is a process in which cooked food is hot filled into impermeable bags from which the oxygen is expelled and then sealed or crimped closed.  Sous Vide is French for under vacuum. It is a method of cooking in which raw or partially cooked food is placed in a hermetically sealed, impermeable bag, and heated for an extended period of time at rel atively low temperatures.  Vacuum Packaging is removing air from a package and hermetically sealing it. What is Reduced Oxygen Packaging ROP Safety Concerns The ROP does not allow the spoilage microorganisms to grow thereby extending the shelf life of the
The ROP does not allow the spoilage microorganisms to grow thereby extending the shelf life of the product. However, as a result of the reduction in oxygen, a suitable environment may exist for certain pathogenic bacteria such as Clostridium botulinum and Listeria monocyto genes which thrive in the absence of oxygen. This can lead to serious food borne illnesses that can be fatal. Safety Guidelines In order to ensure the safety of ROP foods, multiple barriers against the growth of pathogenic microorgan isms such as C. botulinum and L. monocytogenes are needed. Some of the acceptable barriers include  pH of 4.6 or below  Water activity aw below .85  Presence of high levels of nonpathogenic competing microorganisms raw meats, poultry, fermented cheeses with live cultures, etc.  Freezing Enforcement and regulation Food establishments interested in obtaining approval for Reduced Oxygen Packaging must follow Department of Healths regulations. These include instructions that regulate how
must follow Department of Healths regulations. These include instructions that regulate how the food is packaged, what equipment is used to package and cook it, what internal temperatures the food must reach, and how it must be rapidly chilled and stored. A Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point HACCP plan for each food item must be submitted and approved by the NYC Department of Health and Mental Hygiene before ROP for that food is permitted at a retail food establishment. For further information on Reduced Oxygen Packaging and submission of HACCP plans, please contact the Bureau of Food Safety and Community Sanitation at 212676160001 or use the following link httphome2.nyc.govhtmldohdownloadspdf riiriiredoxygenpackaging.pdf REDUCED OXYGEN PACKAGING ROP 56 N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E Regulation Restricting the Sale of Tobacco Products to Minors R etail sellers of tobacco products are prohibited from selling tobacco products to
to Minors R etail sellers of tobacco products are prohibited from selling tobacco products to persons under 18 years of age.  Sales may be made only to individ uals who provide a drivers license or other photographic identifica tion issued by a government entity or school indicating that the person is at least 18 years of age.  No employee under the age of 18 is permitted to sell, dispense or handle tobacco products unless that employee is under the direct supervision of the retailer or another employee who is at least 18 years of age and is on the premises.  Sales of cigarettes or other tobac co products that have been removed from packaging which bears the health warning is pro hibited.  Retailers must post a sign in a conspicuous place with the fol lowing statement SALE OF CIGARETTES, CIGARS, CHEWING TOBACCO, POW DERED TOBACCO, OR OTHER TOBACCO PRODUCTS TO PERSONS UNDER EIGH TEEN YEARS OF AGE IS PRO HIBITED BY LAW. The sign referred to above can be obtained from the Department of
OF AGE IS PRO HIBITED BY LAW. The sign referred to above can be obtained from the Department of Consumer Affairs, 42 Broadway, If you wish to post your own sign, the law requires that the sign be printed on a white card in red letters at least onehalf inch in height. LOCAL LAW 83 New York City SmokeFree Air Act of 2002 L ocal Law 47, the New York City SmokeFree Air Act, was signed into law on December 30, 2002. The Act makes virtually all work places in the City of New York smokefree, including many places where smoking had previously been permitted. All work sites are required to develop, distribute and post their smokefree policy, in accordance with the law, which became effective on March 30, 2003. Why the law is needed Tobacco use is the leading epidemic of our time, killing more than 440,000 people nationwide each year. In 2002, approximately 1,000 New Yorkers died because of exposure to secondhand smoke. What businesses are affected The law, which went into effect on March 30,
to secondhand smoke. What businesses are affected The law, which went into effect on March 30, 2003, made virtually all establishments and businesses with employees smokefree. These include  All office buildings, factories, and warehouses.  All private offices and previously designated smoking lounges.  All food service establishments, restaurants, and catering halls.  All bars, including bars in restaurants.  Membership associations.  All areas of theatres.  Banks, educational and health care facilities, and child day care centers.  Shopping malls and retail stores where goods are sold or rented to the public.  Sports arenas, roller and iceskating rinks, billiard parlors, bingo halls, bowling establishments, and other similar places.  Public transportation facilities, reception areas, and waiting rooms. LOCAL LAW 47 LOCAL LAW 12 CPR Regulations T averns and restaurants that sell food for onpremise consump tion are required to have resuscitation equipment on the premises.
sell food for onpremise consump tion are required to have resuscitation equipment on the premises. Resuscitation equipment required includes  1 adult exhaled resuscitation mask  1 pediatric exhaled air resusci tation mask  2 pair of latex gloves  A sign notifying the customers where the equipment is located These masks must be certified for use by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. A notice must be posted to indicate to customers that the resuscitation equipment is avail able, where it is available, and where they can learn CPR. This informa tion can be provided on a sign or on the menu. The owners of the estab lishment or the staff are under no obligation to use the equipment or give medical assistance to a victim. To learn CPR and for more information, contact the American Red Cross. fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L 57 fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E To
M A N U A L N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E To comply with the new law 1.Update your workplace smoking policy to reflect the new law. 2.Talk with your customers and employees about the law and pre pare them for the changes. 3.Discuss the new law with employ ees including what they should do to comply with the law  Request any person smoking to refrain from smoking inside the workplace.  Refer to the law and to workplace policy when dealing with refusals to not smoke in the work place.  Remind them that the business or building owner may be assessed fines for infractions.  Request staff to report problems directly to the management or owner of the business, or to the buildings management. 4.Post no smoking signs at all entrances as required including bathrooms, stairwells on each floor, bulletin boards, and other promi nent places. 5.Remove all ashtrays from the premises as required. 6.Contact the NYC Department of Health and Mental
all ashtrays from the premises as required. 6.Contact the NYC Department of Health and Mental Hygiene for additional information, to register a complaint, and for compliance sup port at 311. In addition, the Departments website at nyc.govhealth will be updated with the most current information. Exceptions The New York City SmokeFree Air Act has been modified by passage of a new State law, the New York State Clean Indoor Air Act of 2003, which became effective July 24, 2003. The law voids some of the exemp tions in the New York City law passed in December 2002. The few rare exceptions to the smokefree poli cy that became effective July 24, 2003, are  Tobacco bars that were in existence on December 31, 2001, that sells or rent tobacco products and devices, and that derive 10 or more of their income from these sales or rentals  Nonprofit membership associa tions with no employees. The above facilities must apply for an exemption and register with the New York City Department of Health
facilities must apply for an exemption and register with the New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene.  In any restaurant, smoking is limit ed to 25 of seating in a single outdoor dining area. An outdoor dining area is defined as one with no roof, overhang, or other ceiling enclosure.  Residential and certain day treat ment health care facilities may pro vide smoking rooms for some patients.  Hotel rooms that specifically allow for smoking not public areas such as lobbies, meeting rooms, bars and restaurants.  Retail tobacco stores devoted pri marily to the sale of tobacco prod ucts sale of other items account for less than 50 of total annual gross sales.  Tobacco promotional events with specific parameters. Under the New York City Smoke Free Air Act of 2002, previous excep tions for owner operated bars and separate smoking rooms in bars are no longer permitted due to restric tions in the State Clean Indoor Air Act. Remember This law does not apply to private homes. For a
tions in the State Clean Indoor Air Act. Remember This law does not apply to private homes. For a more detailed explanation of exceptions, registration, and regulation require ments, visit the Departments website at nyc.govhealth. Penalties Each violation will be subject to fines. First violation Civil penalties of not less than 200 and not more than 400. Second violation within 12 months of the first violation Civil penalties of not less than 500 and not more than 1,000. Third or subsequent violation within 12 months of the first viola tion Civil penalties of not less than 1,000 and not more than 2,000. The New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene may sus pend or revoke the permit of an establishment that is found in viola tion of the law on three separate occa sions within a 12month period. Enforcement The New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygienes Bureau of Food Safety and Community Sanitation is responsible for enforce ment of the law as part of its
of Food Safety and Community Sanitation is responsible for enforce ment of the law as part of its current inspection operations. Inspections may also be performed in response to complaints. Enforcement began on March 30, 2003, when the law went into effect. You can register com plaints by calling 311. To report violations of the law, call 311 or visit www.nyc.govhealth For help quitting smoking, call 311 No Smoking This is a smokefree establishment. NYC SmokeFree Air Act Local Law No. 47 of 2002 58 N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E T he following sections, extracted from the New York City Health Code, are presented here because they related specifically to permit suspension, revocation and the inspection process. 3.1 5 Interfering with or obstructing Department personnel gifts, gratuities and bribes. a No person shall interfere with or obstruct Department personnel in carrying out an inspection, survey or examination or in the
or obstruct Department personnel in carrying out an inspection, survey or examination or in the performance of any other duty for the Department or Board. b No person shall give or offer a gift, gratuity, bene fit, favor or bribe, including but not limited to money, food, and drink, to an employee or agent of the Department engaged in carrying out an inspection, sur vey or examination or in the performance of any other duty for the Department or Board. Notes This section is derived from S.C. 186. The section has been expanded to include interference with or obstruction of any Department personnel during the performance of any duty for the Department or Board. The section heading was amended and subsection b was added on October 6, 1992 to specifically prohibit the giving or offering of gifts, gratuities, benefits, favors or bribes, or any other thing of value to an employee of the Department in the course of the performance of duty by such employee. Section 566 of the Charter provides
in the course of the performance of duty by such employee. Section 566 of the Charter provides for right of entry of officers of the Department. See also, section 3.01 and the annotations thereto, particu larly Frank v. Maryland, 79 S. Ct.804 1959, District of Columbia v. Little, 339 U.S. 1, 70 S. Ct. 468, 94 L. Ed. 599 1950 and People v. Maddeus, 5 A.D. 2d 886, 172 N.Y.S. 2d 607 2d Dept. 1958 affd without opinion 4 N.Y. 2d 1003, 177 N.Y.S. 2d 517 1958. For a case interpreting S.C. 186, see People v. Strudled, 96 Misc. 650, 161 N.Y.S. 1105 Gen. Sess. 1916. 5.17 Suspension and revocation by Board or Commissioner. b The Board may suspend or revoke any permit for willful or continued violation of this Code or for such other reason as the Board determines is sufficient grounds for suspension or revocation. b When, pursuant to this Code, a permit is issued by the Commissioner, he may suspend or revoke such permit for willful or continued violation of this Code or for such other reason as
or revoke such permit for willful or continued violation of this Code or for such other reason as he determines is sufficient grounds for suspension or revocation. c When, pursuant to this Code, a permit is issued by the Commissioner, he or she may suspend or revoke such permit for the giving or offering to an employee or agent of the Department engaged in carrying out an inspec tion, survey or examination or in the performance of any other duty for the Department or Board, a gift, gratuity, benefit, favor or bribe, including but not limited to money, food, or drink. Tobacco Vending Machine Regulations D istribution of tobacco products through vending machines is prohibited in all food service estab lishments except taverns. Also known as bars, a tavern is an establishment where alcoholic bev erages are sold and served for on site consumption and in which the ser vice of food, if served at all is inci dental to the sale of such beverages. Service of food shall be considered incidental
at all is inci dental to the sale of such beverages. Service of food shall be considered incidental if the food generates less than 40 of total annual gross sales. Taverns that operate a cigarette vending machine must ensure that the vending machine  Be placed at least 25 feet from any entrance to the premises and directly visible by the owner or his employee.  Have a sign affixed to it, which is visible to the public, which identifies the wholesale or retail dealers Cigarette license number Expiration date of license number License holders name Place of business Phone number  Have a third sign which states that the sale of cigarettes to minors is prohibited. The sign must be in red lettering on a white card. It must be displayed conspicuously. This sign is available free of charge at the Department of Consumer Affairs 42 Broadway, NYC. LOCAL LAW 67 NYC HEALTH CODE EXTRACTS fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L 59 fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L N E
E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L 59 fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E d 1 When a permit is issued by the Commissioner pursuant to this Code, he or she may suspend such per mit for failing to answer or appear for a hearing, or respond to a finding or notice of violation or order issued by the Department and answerable to the Administrative Tribunal established by Article 7, or any other tribunal having jurisdiction to hear and adjudi cate violations of this Code. 2 A permit suspended pursuant to subdivision 1 hereof shall remain suspended unless and until the default is vacated or the penalty imposed if any is satis fied. The action of the Commissioner suspending a per mit pursuant to this subsection shall not be stayed upon the filing of an appeal in accordance with Section 5.21 of this Code. e All permits revoked pursuant to this section shall be surrendered forthwith to the
of this Code. e All permits revoked pursuant to this section shall be surrendered forthwith to the Department. Notes This section is derived from S.C. 191e. The first clause of that section, Notwithstanding any other provision of the Sanitary Code or any of the regulations thereunder has been omitted as unnecessary. Authority to delegate to the Commissioner the power to issue per mits, by way of Code provision, is expressly contained in Charter 561 which provides in part Whenever the board of health in the sanitary code authorizes the issuance, suspension or revocation of a permit by the commissioner, his action shall be subject of review by the board of health upon an appeal by the party aggrieved under such rules as it may provide. Sections 5.17 through 5.21 constitute such rules. The same section of the Charter expressly authorizes the Board, . . . in its discretion to grant, suspend or revoke permits for busi nesses or other matters in respect to any subject regulated by the
or revoke permits for busi nesses or other matters in respect to any subject regulated by the department. Note that the Charter 558c empowers the Board to . . . embrace in the sanitary code all matters and subjects to which the power and authority of the department extends, not limiting their application to the subject of health only. On the power to regulate by way of license and the imposition of a license fee, see Smart v. City of Albany, 146 Misc. 60, 260 N.Y.S. 579 Sup. Ct. 1932. Subsection c was relettered to subsection d and new subsection c was adopted on June 26, 1990 to authorize the Commissioner to suspend a permit when the person or entity holding the permit fails to respond for a hearing. New subsection c was added and subsections c and d were relettered to subsections d and e on October 6,1992 to clearly establish as a ground for revocation or suspension of a permit the giving or offering of gifts, gratuities, benefits, favors or bribes, or any other thing of value to an
or offering of gifts, gratuities, benefits, favors or bribes, or any other thing of value to an employee of the Department in the course of the performance of duty by such. QUICK REVIEW 1. Smoking may be permitted only at the bars.  TRUE  FALSE 2. No Smoking signs must be posted at all smoke free areas.  TRUE  FALSE 3. Ashtrays are permitted on dining tables as long as No Smoking signs are conspicuously displayed.  TRUE  FALSE 4. Tobacco vending machines are prohibited in all food service establishments except taverns or bars.  TRUE  FALSE 5. Any food service establishment that allows onsite consumption of food must provide a cardiopulmonary resuscitation CPR kit in case of an emergency.  TRUE  FALSE 60 N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E Why Should I be concerned about Food Defense The retail food establishment is the front line in protecting our food supply. Thousands of people stop every day to have a snack, a drink or a full meal at
our food supply. Thousands of people stop every day to have a snack, a drink or a full meal at a restaurant. There are countless opportunities to tam per with food. What can I do about it Even a small incident can bank rupt a food establishment. Take the time to perform this selfassessment of your operation. It can help you lower your risk of being a target and also can improve your work practices. Why do a selfassessment A selfassessment will take less than an hour and will provide you with a valuable snapshot of your operation. SelfAssessment is a powerful man agement tool. By examining your operation, you may find ways to improve not just security and safety, but general work practice. How do I do a SelfAssessment There are three basic steps to self assessment 1 Document your operation. Write down what you do and how you do it. To find out what is really happen ing, ask your employees to describe in detail how they do each task. Use the checklist at the end as a guide. 2 Compare
to describe in detail how they do each task. Use the checklist at the end as a guide. 2 Compare your systems to rec ommended practices or standards. This chapter provides information on food safety and security practices. Note areas where you can make changes. 3 Get help where you need it. Consult experts, including your local health department, vendors and your police department, for advice on how to best address your specific safety and security issues. YOUR FACILITY Unrestricted access to your opera tion makes it an easy target for food tampering or other terrorist activity. Key Points  Restrict customers to public areas only.  Limit facility access to employees and contractors only. Security Strategies Property Security. This could include any of the following  Do a walkthrough inspection of your facility and storage areas daily.  Provide outside lighting. Make it difficult for someone to approach your facility without being seen.  Request regular police patrols.  Provide fences
to approach your facility without being seen.  Request regular police patrols.  Provide fences or other barriers around your property.  Provide surveillance. An alarm system or video surveillance sys tem is expensive. If there has been a problem with building security in the past, however, it may be a wise investment. Building Security  Close and lock service doors, except during deliveries  Discourage loitering.  Restrict key access to trusted employees. Know who has keys at all times. YOUR EMPLOYEES Your employees and their training are vital to food safety and security Key Points  Do employee background checks and verify information given.  Train employees to recognize security risks and report them to management.  Ensure each shift manager knows what to do if an incident occurs. Security Strategies New Employees Perform com plete background checks on all potential employees. Verify refer ences, phone numbers and informa tion on immigration status and criminal record. Actively
refer ences, phone numbers and informa tion on immigration status and criminal record. Actively supervise new employees to ensure that they learn and follow established procedures. All Employees. Keeping experi enced employees is an excellent security strategy. In addition to establishing mutual trust, your employees will perform at a higher level of skill.  Train all employees to recognize food safety and security threats, including food tampering. Train employees to report problems to a supervisor immediately.  Limit employee access to areas needed for their job functions.  Keep a roster of all employees expected on each shift and dis courage offduty employees from loitering.  Keep personal items out of the work and storage areas. Have a separate place to store personal belongings. YOUR PRODUCTS The products you buy and how you store and use them are critical in protecting your business. Key Points  Know who delivers to your facility and what they deliver.  Have someone available to
Key Points  Know who delivers to your facility and what they deliver.  Have someone available to accept all deliveries.  Store food and nonfood items separately and secure all products. FOOD DEFENSE STRATEGIES Prepared by New York State Department of Health A SelfAssessment Guide for Food Service Operators fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L 61 fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E Security Strategies Receiving  Purchase food products from known vendors.  Ask for identification from unknown delivery people.  Schedule deliveries to arrive only when staff is present.  Inspect all items for damage upon delivery and check against your invoices.  Take temperatures of chilled foods before accepting. Dont accept refrigerated deliveries over 41F.  Do not allow food to sit in the receiving area. Store food as soon as possible in the designated location. Storage  Store food and
receiving area. Store food as soon as possible in the designated location. Storage  Store food and nonfood items separately. Keep all items securely.  Lock all storage areas, including outside storage, when unattended.  Know the types of chemicals you have on hand and dispose of chemicals no longer used.  Secure chemical storage areas. YOUR FOOD PREPARATION STEPS Food preparation practices can lower your risk of problems Key Points  Examine ingredients before using them. Dont use a food that has an unusual look or smell.  Develop a routine for all tasks. When food is prepared the same way every time, it is easier to know if something is not right. Security Strategies Food Preparation  Inspect cans and packages for damage prior to using.  Examine ingredients before use and dont use a food that has an unusual look or smell.  Establish standardized procedures for food preparation and train employees in these procedures. Routinely check that those proce dures are followed.  Cook foods
employees in these procedures. Routinely check that those proce dures are followed.  Cook foods thoroughly to destroy food pathogens.  Use a calibrated probe thermometer to check temperature every time.  Strictly enforce no bare hand policies use of gloves and tongs with readytoeat foods. Food Holding  Know safe temperatures for hot and cold holding and check tem peratures often.  Hold hot food above 140F.  Cold holding units, such as sand wich prep units, should keep products below 41F. Keep lids and doors closed.  Limit hot holding unit access to preparation and service staff. YOUR CUSTOMER SERVICE AREA Control of the service area prevents product tampering Key Points  Place selfservice stations, such as salad bars and buffets, in areas where staff can easily supervise them.  Beware of anyone lingering in the selfservice area. Security Strategies Customers.  Keep customers out of food preparation areas.  Do not discuss your security mea sures with anyone.  Be aware of anyone
of food preparation areas.  Do not discuss your security mea sures with anyone.  Be aware of anyone lingering in self service areas or anyone who seems overly interested in your operations.  Be alert for packages and bags left unattended. SelfService Areas  Place selfservice areas like salad bars where staff can watch them.  Put out only as much food as you need.  Replace food containers when replenishing salad bars or buffets. Dont add new food to old con tainers.  Rotate foods such as croutons or condiments regularly. YOUR CLEANING PRACTICES One of the best defenses against foodborne illness is your cleaning and sanitizing routine. Key Points  Follow instructions on using equip ment and cleaners exactly. Improper use can lessen the cleaning effect.  Clean and sanitize as often as possible. Security Strategies Cleaning  Use only chemicals approved for use in a food establishment.  Follow directions for cleaners and sanitizers exactly. Too little or too much detergent or sanitizer can
directions for cleaners and sanitizers exactly. Too little or too much detergent or sanitizer can actually be less effective Ask your supplier for advice.  Clean and sanitize equipment and work areas after each use.  To ensure proper sanitizing, check water temperature or sani tizer concentration frequently. Chemical Storage  Store chemicals away from food preparation areas.  Secure chemical storage areas at all times.  Use cleaners and sanitizers according to manufacturers recommendations.  Discard old chemicals as instruct ed on the label. The Food Defense Assessment Checklist is available at httpwww.health.state.ny.usnysdohenviron fooddocsfooddefensestrategies.pdf 62 N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E T rans fat in food raises a per sons bad cholesterol LDL and lowers good cholesterol HDL, increasing the risk of heart disease. Todays consumers are increasingly looking for a healthy alternative on the menu. Taking artificial trans
consumers are increasingly looking for a healthy alternative on the menu. Taking artificial trans fat out of your kitchen is one important way to serve your customers and your business. What is Trans Fat A small amount of trans fat in our diet is naturally occurring but the largest source of trans fat is arti ficially made. Artificial trans fat is made when hydrogen is added to vegetable oil. These oils are called partially hydrogenated. Any food made with partially hydrogenated oil contains trans fat. What Ingredients Contain Trans Fat Restaurants commonly cook and fry with partially hydrogenated oils. Other common restaurant ingredients that contain artificial trans fat are veg etable shortenings and margarines. What Restaurant Foods Commonly Contain Trans Fat  Fried and prefried foods French fries, fried chicken, chicken nuggets, fish fillets, tortilla chips, taco shells and donuts.  Baked goods Hamburger buns, crackers, cookies, pizza dough, cakes, pies and pastries.  Premixed
Baked goods Hamburger buns, crackers, cookies, pizza dough, cakes, pies and pastries.  Premixed ingredients Pancake mix, hot chocolate, salad dressing, crou tons and breadcrumbs. All these products are available without trans fat made without par tially hydrogenated vegetable oil. Spot the Hidden Trans Fat in Your Kitchen You wont know if you are serving trans fat unless you check for the words partially hydrogenated on the ingredients list on all packaging avoid using these products Heres a sample ingredient list The FDA now requires that Nutrition Facts panels on all pack aged foods sold to consumers must list trans fat content. However, foods sold only to restaurants are not required to provide this infor mation. Be sure to check the ingre dients list on all products. Some packaged foods may list 0 grams of trans fat on their Nutrition Facts panel, but also list partially hydro genated oil in their ingredient list. Companies can say a food is 0 grams trans fat if it contains less
oil in their ingredient list. Companies can say a food is 0 grams trans fat if it contains less than 12 a gram per serving. If par tially hydrogenated oil is on the label, the food is not trans fat free. Clear Your Kitchen of Trans Fat  Change your oils and switch to a cooking oil that is not hydro genated and avoid shortening or hard vegetable oil.  Instead of stick margarine or but ter, choose soft tub spreads with saturated and no trans fat.  Buy prepared foods with no trans fat Ask your food suppliers for baked products, prefried and packaged foods that are made without partially hydrogenated vegetable oil. The Citys Trans Fat Regulations New York Citys Health Code amendment phases out the use of TRANS FAT WHAT EVERY RESTAURANT AND FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT NEEDS TO KNOW Partially Hydrogenated Vegetable Oil  Trans Fat   Heart Disease Risk fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L 63 fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T
A N U A L 63 fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E artificial trans fat in all food service establishments required to hold a New York City Health Department permit, including restaurants, cater ers, mobile foodvending units, and mobile food commissaries Beginning July 1, 2008 1. No food containing partially hydrogenated vegetable oils, shortenings, or margarines with 0.5 grams or more trans fat per serving may be stored, used or served by food service establish ments. The regulation does not apply to food served in the man ufacturers original, sealed pack age, such as a bag of potato chips. You will need to save the label for any oils, shortenings, or margarines used for frying, panfrying sauting, or grilling, or as a spread, until the product is completely used. Labels may be kept on the product con tainer, photocopied, or kept sepa rately. III. You will need to save the label for any
product con tainer, photocopied, or kept sepa rately. III. You will need to save the label for any oils, shortenings, or margarines used for frying, panfrying sauting, or grilling, or as a spread, until the product is completely used. Labels may be kept on the product container, photocopied, or kept separately. How do I tell if a particular prod uct is allowed under the regulation  Step 1 Look at the package label or ingredients list to see if par tially hydrogenated, shortening, or margarine are listed. If none of these terms appear, you may use the product. If any of these terms are listed, go to Step 2 to see if the product contains too much trans fat.  Step 2. Check the Nutrition Facts panel for trans fat content. If the panel says the product has 0 grams of trans fat, or less than 0.5 grams of trans fat per serving, you may use the product. If the Nutrition Facts panel says the product has 0.5 grams or more trans fat, you may not use the product. If there is no Nutrition Facts
has 0.5 grams or more trans fat, you may not use the product. If there is no Nutrition Facts panel on the product, go to Step 3.  Step 3. If there is no Nutrition Facts panel, ask your supplier to provide a letter from the manu facturer listing the products ingredients. If the ingredients list contains the words partially hydrogenated, shortening, or margarine, the letter must also include information on the amount of trans fat in each serv ing. As in Step 2, if the product has 0 grams of trans fat, or less than 0.5 grams of trans fat per serving, you may use it. The let ter should be on the manufactur ers letterhead and show the man ufacturers name and address. Keep the letter at your food ser vice establishment, available for review by a NYC DOHMH inspector. Also beginning July 1, 2008, when the regulation takes full effect, you will need to save the label for any food containing oils, shortenings, or margarines, regard less of how you use the product. For instance, if you are
oils, shortenings, or margarines, regard less of how you use the product. For instance, if you are frying frozen French fries, you should save the label for both the frying oil and the French fries until both have been completely used. When buying containers of oil that are shipped in a box, the con tainers may not have labels but the box should. Save the ingredients label and the Nutrition Facts panel from the box along with the prod ucts brand name and common name, until the product has been completely used. These labels should be available for review by a Health Department inspector. 64 N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E Switching To 0 grams Trans Fat Products... fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L 65 fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E What Your Establishment Needs to Know about Posting Calories on Menus and Menu
T A L H Y G I E N E What Your Establishment Needs to Know about Posting Calories on Menus and Menu Boards New York City Health Code Section 81.50 requires covered food service establishments FSEs that hold New York City Health Department permits to post calorie information prominently on menu boards and menus. Covered FSEs, including mobile food vending units, within New York City must post calorie informa tion prominently on menus and menu boards. The requirement applies to FSEs that  Are required to hold a New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene NYC DOHMH permit.  Belong to a group of 15 or more FSEs that operate under common ownership or are individually fran chised, whether locally or nationally, or do business under the same name.  Offer substantially the same menu items, in servings that are standardized for portion size and content. A Food Service Establishment subject to this regulation must post calorie information on  All menu boards and menus.  Item tagsfood
to this regulation must post calorie information on  All menu boards and menus.  Item tagsfood items displayed for sale with food item tags.  Any other list or pictorial display of a food item or items and prices posted and visible within the food service establishment.  Menu boards or adjacent stanchions at or prior to the point of ordering for drivethrough window. This requirement does not apply to menu items that are listed on a menu or menu board for less than 30 days in a calendar year. For additional information please call 311 or go to httpwww.nyc.govhtmldohdownloadspdfcdpcal oriecomplianceguide.pdf 66 N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E E mployers of food service estab lishments not only have a responsibility to safeguard public health, but also responsibility to provide a safe and healthy work place for their employees. Under the U.S. Occupational Health and Safety Administration OSHA, employers must also provide their
the U.S. Occupational Health and Safety Administration OSHA, employers must also provide their employees with a workplace free from recognized hazards causing or likely to cause death or serious physical harm. Health and safety hazards and risks for workers may be found throughout food establishments, espe cially in the the kitchen. Some of the most common injuries to restaurant workers are Muscle strains, sprains and tears from slips, trips and falls overexertion in lifting repetitive motions reaching and twisting. Cuts and lacerations from knives food and beverage process ing machinery such as slicers, grinders and mixers and broken glass. Burns and scalds from hot liq uids hot oils and grease heating and cooking equipment such as ovens and grills hot pots and trays and steam. Controlling Hazards How can you prevent injuries among your workers 1 Training One of the least expensive and most essential ways of preventing work related injuries is through training. Every new employee
and most essential ways of preventing work related injuries is through training. Every new employee should receive an orientation and be trained in health and safety policies and proce dures. Additionally, training your workers on a regular basis ensures that new hazardous conditions or other safety problems are reported and discussed. Be sure to get input from your workers on how to resolve problems. Workers often come up with the best ideas on injury pre vention The majority of food service workers in New York City are foreign born. Written materials on safety rules and policies should be available in languages understood by your staff. Check with the DOHMH Restaurant Worker Health  Safety project for available educational materials 212 7884290. 2 Check Your Workplace Use the Restaurant Safety Checklist to do a quick assessment of your safety program facility for areas needing improvement. The checklist below can be used to audit your workplace on a daily or weekly basis. A more
The checklist below can be used to audit your workplace on a daily or weekly basis. A more comprehensive check list tool for more periodic audits is available through the DOHMH Restaurant Worker Health and Safety program. Auditing your workplace helps to document cor rective actions needed, identify responsible parties, and track expected remediation date and veri fication of action taken. The tool should be used annually or as often as necessary.  Slips, trips, and falls  Pathwaysexits are free of trip hazards.  Pathways and exits should be marked, well lit and have mirrors on the blind corners.  Spills are cleaned up immediately.  Floors around fryer and grill are kept free of grease.  Floors around dishwasher are kept clean and dry.  Workers are wearing slip resistant shoes.  Cuts and lacerations  Guards are used on meat slicers, breadbagel slicers, mixers, etc.  Workers who use electrical machinery keep long hair tied back and remove loose jewelry and rings.  Knives are out of the
machinery keep long hair tied back and remove loose jewelry and rings.  Knives are out of the sink and in a designated drawer or rack.  Tamps, push sticks, or other tools are used to feed or remove food from grinders, slicers, and choppers.  Burns  Pot holders, mitts, and gloves are used to handle hot items  Pot handles and cooking utensils are turned away from edges of counters or stove fronts.  Heated oil is never left unattend ed and is cooled before handling.  Workers get assistance when moving heavy or large pots of hot liquid.  Electrocutions and fires  Damaged electrical cords, broken plugs, and broken equipment are taken out of service. Grill exhaust filters are cleaned daily.  Portable fire extinguishers are fully charged, in operating condi tion and available in the kitchen and public assembly space.  Muscle strains and sprains  Workers use safe lifting techniques and get assistance for awkward or heavy items.  Rubber floor mats are in place and cleaned daily.  Get help
assistance for awkward or heavy items.  Rubber floor mats are in place and cleaned daily.  Get help whenever lifting heavy objects. 3 Implement Solutions Dont wait until the next accident, injury incident to take action Once youve assessed your workplace, identify the steps needed to correct the problem. See some possible solutions for common restaurant hazards in the following table. WORKPLACE SAFETY AND HEALTH fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L 67 fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E Sprains and Strains Slip, Trip and Fall Injuries Cuts and Lacerations Burns and Scalds Workplace Violence Transportation Incidents Exposures to harmful substances Lifting heavy loads Awkward reaches Repetitive movements Wet floors grease spills. Reduced vision when carrying sacks or large boxes on stairs Cluttered walkways, storage areas Knife cuts Faulty machinery Broken glass
or large boxes on stairs Cluttered walkways, storage areas Knife cuts Faulty machinery Broken glass Splattered oil Hot pots and pans Steam Greaseelectrical fires Dealing with irate customers Robberies Domestic violence towards staff Violence between customers Motor vehicle injuries Car accidents Runover Pesticides Cleaners Refrigerants Infectious materials blood from cuts  needles, etc.ed Provide smaller bus pans and trays. Use hand trucks to assist with lifting. Train workers on safe lifting methods. Lift heavy items only when necessary. Get assistance in lifting heavy items. Store heavy items on lower shelves. Use ladder and footstools instead of reaching. Rotate tasks that require the same motion over  over. Mop up spills promptly. Make sure workers wear correct shoes with slip resistant soles. Provide rubber mats in nongreasy areas dish washing. Ensure mats remain clean and in place. Use noskid waxes and floor surfaces coated with grit. Make sure stairways are well lit. Place
Use noskid waxes and floor surfaces coated with grit. Make sure stairways are well lit. Place brightly colored hazard tape on top and bottom step. Keep knives sharp, store knives properly. Provide the proper knives for the specif ic task and train workers on having the right knife for the job. Inspect regularly to make sure safety devices, such as guards, are in working order Make sure food is dry when placed in hot oil. Workers should wear chef jackets long sleeved to protect their upper bodies. Wait till oil in deep fryers is cool before han dling or transferring. Provide oven mitts, dry towels to handle hot equipment. Open lids on hot pots away from body. Keep handles pointed away from stove edge. Install fire suppression system in kitchen. Ensure vent hoods and grease traps are regularly cleaned. Replace frayedfaulty electrical cords and plugs. Keep cash register funds to a minimum. Vary the time of day that the register is emptied. Count cash in a secure room. Provide training so
Vary the time of day that the register is emptied. Count cash in a secure room. Provide training so that workers can defuse potential violence. Develop plan and train workers on dealing with hostile customers. Coordinate with local police precinct. Equip bicycle with reflectors and bell. Wear safety gear reflective vest, helmet. Back up mirror for delivery trucks. Do not use cell phone while ridingdriving. Label all hazardous substances. Store separately. Use only the amount necessary to get the job done. Ensure good ventilation when using cleaners. Install carbon monoxide alarm near heating and cooking equipment and carbon dioxide monitors in areas where dry ice or CO2 gas tanks will be used. Train workers on avoiding exposure and using personal protective equipment. INJURY HAZARDS POSSIBLE SOLUTIONS Bike Safety for Delivery Workers Bicycle delivery workers face a seri ous risk of injury or death. Between 1996 and 2005, 225 bicyclists died in crashes. Nearly all bicyclist fatali ties
or death. Between 1996 and 2005, 225 bicyclists died in crashes. Nearly all bicyclist fatali ties occurred as a result of crashes with motor vehicles and most crashes occurred at or near intersec tions. Nearly all bicyclists who died 97 were not wearing a helmet. The Law City laws require businesses to sup ply their bicycle delivery workers with helmets and other safety devices. The laws also require that commercial bike riders wear the helmets while cycling on the job. Employers must provide each bicy cle delivery worker with  Helmet that meets city safety standards  Lamp  Bell  Brakes  Reflectors See the brochures below for more information on how to keep yourself and your employees safe. THE NEW YORK CITY DEPARTMENT of HEALTH and MENTAL HYGIENE Bill de Blasio, Mayor Mary T. Bassett, MD, MPH, Commissioner 68 N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E EVERY RESTAURANT CAN ACHIEVE AN Avoid Common Sanitary Violations Follow the steps below to
I E N E EVERY RESTAURANT CAN ACHIEVE AN Avoid Common Sanitary Violations Follow the steps below to practice Agrade food safety and keep your customers safe from foodborne illness. Avoid the most commonly cited violations and improve your chances to achieve an A. Be sure employees are trained in basic food safety and supervised by someone who has a food protection certificate.  Arrange work schedules so that a supervisor with a food protection certificate is on duty whenever your restaurant is receiving or preparing food, or is open to the public.  Train supervisors to use the SelfInspection Worksheet to regularly evaluate and improve the restaurants condition and employees food safety practices.  Provide food safety training for all employees who handle food. Hold food at the proper temperature.  Review Health Department rules for temperature holding requirements.  Be sure equipment used to hold hot and cold food is working properly.  Use thermometers to monitor the temperature of
used to hold hot and cold food is working properly.  Use thermometers to monitor the temperature of foods in hot or cold storage.  Track food taken from hot or cold storage, and record how long it is out. Control conditions that promote pests.  Seal all cracks, crevices and holes in walls, cabinets and doors to prevent rodents, cockroaches and flies from entering.  Install rodentproof door sweeps on outside doors.  Store food and garbage in pestproof containers.  Clean grease, oil and food particles from all surfaces and equipment, including the floor underneath.  Keep range hoods clean and greasefree.  Contract with a pest control professional licensed to work in restaurants. Protect food from contamination during storage, preparation, transportation and display.  Keep food covered until served.  Keep food separated by temperature and type. Avoid crosscontamination by separating potentially hazardous foods like raw poultry from readytoeat items like salad mix. Maintain all food
hazardous foods like raw poultry from readytoeat items like salad mix. Maintain all food surfaces.  Clean and sanitize all foodpreparation surfaces after each use remove cakedon food.  Repair or replace deeplygrooved cutting boards and chipped or broken surfaces so they can be properly sanitized. Maintain all nonfood surfaces.  Review Health Department rules on acceptable materials surfaces should be smooth and cleanable.  Keep all surfaces clean. Maintain all plumbing and check it frequently.  Monitor all plumbing fixtures and make needed repairs iimmediately.  Be sure plumbing is fitted with approved devices valves, antisiphonage pieces, vacuum breakers to prevent backflow.  Clean and maintain grease traps. Michael R. Bloomberg Mayor Thomas Farley, M.D., M.P.H. Commissioner March 2012 EMPLOYERS READ THESE TIPS AND POST FOR YOUR EMPLOYEES TO READ TOO. fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L Bill de Blasio Mayor Mary T. Bassett, M.D., M.P.H. Commissioner 69 fo d P R O T E
I N G M A N U A L Bill de Blasio Mayor Mary T. Bassett, M.D., M.P.H. Commissioner 69 fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E Form 198E Food Establishment Inspection Report 70 N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E Rev Dec. 2010 Form D Bureau of Food Safety and Community Sanitation SELFINSPECTION WORKSHEET FOR FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS PART ONE  SCORED VIOLATIONS CONDITIONS SCORE CRITICAL VIOLATIONS l ll lll lV V    10 28 7 8 9 10 28 FOOD TEMPERATURE FOOD SOURCE FOOD PROTECTION 2A Food not cooked to required minimum temperature  Poultry, meat stuffing, stuffed meats  165F for 15 seconds  Ground meat and food containing ground meat  158F for 15 seconds  Pork, any food containing pork  155F for 15 seconds  Rare roast beef, rare beefsteak except per individual  required temperature and time customer request  All other foods except shell eggs per
individual  required temperature and time customer request  All other foods except shell eggs per individual  145F for 15 seconds customer request 2B Hot food item not held at or above 140F. 7 8 9 10 28 2G Cold food item held above 41F smoked fish and reduced oxygen packaged foods above 38F except during necessary preparation. 7 8 9 10 28 2H Food not cooled by an approved method whereby the internal product temperature is reduced from 140 F to 70 F or less within 2 hours, and from 70F to 41F or less within 4 additional hours.    10 28 3A Food from unapproved or unknown source or home canned. Reduced oxygen packaged ROP fish not frozen before processing or ROP foods prepared on premises transported to another site. 7 8 9 10 28 2J Reduced oxygen packaged ROP foods not cooled by an approved method whereby the internal food temperature is reduced to 38F within two hours of cooking and if necessary further cooled to a temperature of 34F within six hours of reaching 38F. 5 6 7 8  2C Hot
necessary further cooled to a temperature of 34F within six hours of reaching 38F. 5 6 7 8  2C Hot food item that has been cooked and refrigerated is being held for service without first being reheated to 165F or above within 2 hours. 5 6 7 8  2D Precooked potentially hazardous food from commercial food processing establishment that is supposed to be heated, but is not heated to 140F within 2 hours. 5 6    2E Whole frozen poultry or poultry breasts, other than a single portion, is being cooked frozen or partially thawed.    8  2F Meat, fish or molluscan shellfish served raw or undercooked without prior notification to customer. 5 6 7 8  2I Food prepared from ingredients at ambient temperature not cooled to 41F or below within 4 hours.    10 28 3B Shellfish not from approved source, improperly taggedlabeled tags not retained for 90 days. 7 8 9 10 28 3C Eggs found dirtycracked liquid, frozen or powdered eggs not pasteurized. 7 8 9 10 28 3D Canned food product observed swollen, leaking
or powdered eggs not pasteurized. 7 8 9 10 28 3D Canned food product observed swollen, leaking or rusted, and not segregated from other consumable food items.    10 28 3E Potable water supply inadequate. Water or ice not potable or from unapproved source. Cross connection in potable water supply system observed.    10 28 4B Food worker prepares food or handles utensil when ill with a disease transmissible by food, or has exposed infected cut or burn on hand. 7 8 9 10 28 4C Food worker does not use proper utensil to eliminate bare hand contact with food that will not receive adequate additional heat treatment.    10 28 4D Food worker does not wash hands thoroughly after using the toilet, coughing, sneezing, smoking, eating, preparing raw foods or otherwise contaminating hands.    10 28 4F Food, food preparation area, food storage area, area used by employees or patrons contaminated by sewage or liquid waste. 7 8 9 10 28 4H Raw, cooked or prepared food is adulterated, contaminated,
sewage or liquid waste. 7 8 9 10 28 4H Raw, cooked or prepared food is adulterated, contaminated, crosscontaminated or not discarded in accordance with HACCP plan.    10 28 3F Unpasteurized milk or milk product present. 5 6 7 8  3G Raw food not properly washed prior to serving.     10 4A Food Protection Certificate not held by supervisor of food operations. 7 8 9 10 28 4E Toxic chemical improperly labeled, stored or used such that food contamination may occur.    10 28 4G Unprotected potentially hazardous food reserved. 5 6 7 8  4I Unprotected food reserved.  Prepermit Serious PPS Violations that must be corrected before permit is issued  Public Health Hazards PHH must be corrected immediately fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L 71 fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E CONDITIONS SCORE GENERAL VIOLATIONS l ll lll lV V FACILITY DESIGN VERMIN  GARBAGE 5 6 7 8 28 4N Filth
SCORE GENERAL VIOLATIONS l ll lll lV V FACILITY DESIGN VERMIN  GARBAGE 5 6 7 8 28 4N Filth flies or foodrefusesewageassociated FRSA flies present in facilitys food andor nonfood areas. Filth flies include house flies, little house flies, blow flies, bottle flies and flesh flies. Foodrefusesewageassociated flies include fruit flies, drain flies and Phorid flies. 5 6 7 8  4O Live animals other than fish in tank or service animal present in facilitys food andor nonfood areas. 5 6 7 8  6B Tobacco use, eating, or drinking from open container in food preparation, food storage or dishwashing area observed.    8  4J Appropriately scaled metal stemtype thermometer or thermocouple not provided or used to evaluate temperatures of potentially hazardous foods during cooking, cooling, reheating and holding. 5 6 7 8 28 4K Evidence of rats or live rats present in facilitys food andor nonfood areas. 5 6 7 8 28 4L Evidence of mice or live mice present in facilitys food andor nonfood areas. 5 6 7 8 28
6 7 8 28 4L Evidence of mice or live mice present in facilitys food andor nonfood areas. 5 6 7 8 28 4M Live roaches present in facilitys food andor nonfood areas. 5 6 7 8  6C Food not protected from potential source of contamination during storage, preparation, transportation, display or service. 5 6 7 8  6D Food contact surface not properly washed, rinsed or sanitized after each use and following any activity when contamination may have occurred. 5 6 7 8  5 6 7 8  6E Sanitized equipment or utensil, including inuse fooddispensing utensil, improperly used or stored. FOOD SOURCE    10 28 6F Wiping cloths soiled or not stored in sanitizing solution.   4 5  8A Facility not vermin proof. Harborage or conditions conducive to attracting vermin to the premises andor allowing vermin to exist. 2 3 4 5 28 8C Pesticide use not in accordance with label or applicable laws. Prohibited chemical usedstored. Open bait station used. 2 3 4 5  9B Thawing procedures improper.     28 6G HACCP plan not
Open bait station used. 2 3 4 5  9B Thawing procedures improper.     28 6G HACCP plan not approved or approved HACCP plan not maintained on premises. 6I Food not labeled in accordance with HACCP plan.    10 28 7A Duties of an officer of the Department interfered with or obstructed.     28 CRITICAL VIOLATIONS TOTAL 6H Records and logs not maintained to demonstrate that HACCP plan has been properly implemented. 2 3 4 5  8B Covered garbage receptacle not provided or inadequate, except that garbage receptacle may be uncovered during active use. Garbage storage area not properly constructed or maintained grinder or compactor dirty. 2 3 4 5  9A Canned food product observed dented and not segregated from other consumable food items. 2 3 4 5  9C Food contact surface not properly maintained.  Prepermit Serious PPS Violations that must be corrected before permit is issued  Public Health Hazards PHH must be corrected immediately    10 28 5A Sewage disposal system improper or unapproved.    10 28
must be corrected immediately    10 28 5A Sewage disposal system improper or unapproved.    10 28 5B Harmful, noxious gas or vapor detected. CO  13 ppm.    10 28 5E Toilet facility not provided for employees or for patrons when required.    10 28 5F Insufficient or no refrigerated or hot holding equipment to keep potentially hazardous foods at required temperatures.    10 28 5G Properly enclosed servicemaintenance area not provided. Mobile Food Commissary    10 28 5H No facilities available to wash, rinse and sanitize utensils andor equipment. 5 6 7 8  6A Personal cleanliness inadequate. Outer garment soiled with possible contaminant. Effective hair restraint not worn in an area where food is prepared.    10 28 5I Refrigeration used to implement HACCP plan not equipped with an electronic system that continuously monitors time and temperature. 7 8 9 10 28 5C Food contact surface improperly constructed or located. Unacceptable material used.    10 28 5D Handwashing facility not provided
constructed or located. Unacceptable material used.    10 28 5D Handwashing facility not provided in or near food preparation area and toilet room. Hot and cold running water at adequate pressure to enable cleanliness of employees not provided at facility. Soap and an acceptable handdrying device not provided. PERSONAL HYGIENE  OTHER FOOD PROTECTION OTHER CRITICALS 72 N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E OTHER GENERALS SMOKEFREE AIR ACT 2 3 4 5  10A Toilet facility not maintained and provided with toilet paper, waste receptacle and selfclosing door. 2 3 4 5 28 10B Plumbing not properly installed or maintained antisiphonage or backflow prevention device not provided where required equipment or floor not properly drained sewage disposal system in disrepair or not functioning properly. 2 3 4 5  10C Lighting inadequate permanent lighting not provided in food preparation areas, ware washing areas, and storage rooms. 2 3 4 5  10D Mechanical or
in food preparation areas, ware washing areas, and storage rooms. 2 3 4 5  10D Mechanical or natural ventilation system not provided, improperly installed, in disrepair andor fails to prevent excessive buildup of grease, heat, steam condensation vapors, odors, smoke and fumes. 2 3 4 5  10F Nonfood contact surface improperly constructed. Unacceptable material used. Nonfood contact surface or equipment improperly maintained andor not properly sealed, raised, spaced or movable to allow accessibility for cleaning on all sides, above and underneath the unit. 2 3 4 5  10E Accurate thermometer not provided in refrigerated or hot holding equipment. 2 3 4 5  10G Food service operation occurring in room used as living or sleeping quarters. SALE OF HERBAL CIGARETTES TOBACCO HEALTH WARNING AND SMOKING CESSATION SIGN  Prepermit Serious PPS Violations that must be corrected before permit is issued  Public Health Hazards PHH must be corrected immediately 2 3 4 5  10H Proper sanitization not provided
Health Hazards PHH must be corrected immediately 2 3 4 5  10H Proper sanitization not provided for utensil ware washing operation. 2 3 4 5  10I Single service item reused, improperly stored, dispensed not used when required. 2     10J Wash hands sign not posted at handwash facility. 15A Tobacco vending machine present where prohibited. 2 3 4 5 28 99B Other general. DISTRIBUTION OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS THROUGH VENDING MACHINES 15B Tobacco vending machine placed less than 25 feet from entrance to premises. 15C Tobacco vending machine not visible to the operator, employee or agent. 15E Outofpackage sale of tobacco products observed. 15F Employee under the age of 18 selling tobacco products without direct supervision of an adult retail dealer or dealer. 15G Sale to minor observed. 15J Ashtray present in smokefree area. 15K Operator failed to make good faith effort to inform smokers of the SmokeFree Air Act prohibition of smoking. 15L Smoke free workplace smoking policy inadequate, not posted,
Air Act prohibition of smoking. 15L Smoke free workplace smoking policy inadequate, not posted, not provided to employees. 15M Use of tobacco product on school premises at or below the 12th grade level observed. 15N Smoking permitted andor allowed in smoking prohibited area under the operators control. 15O Sale of herbal cigarettes to minors observed. 15P No tobacco health warning and smoking cessation signs are posted. 15Q Tobacco health warning and smoking cessation signs are obstructed andor not prominently displayed. 15R No large tobacco health warning and smoking cessation sign is posted where tobacco products are displayed small signs are not posted at each register or place of payment. 15I No Smoking andor Smoking Permitted sign not conspicuously posted. Health warning not present on Smoking Permitted. 15H Sign prohibiting sale of tobacco products to minors not conspicuously posted. 15D Durable sign with license number, expiration date, address and phone number not posted.
posted. 15D Durable sign with license number, expiration date, address and phone number not posted. TOBACCO PRODUCT REGULATION ACT FACILITY MAINTENANCE GENERAL VIOLATIONS TOTAL CRITICAL AND GENERAL COMBINED TOTAL PART TWO  UNSCORED VIOLATIONS CONDITION YES OBSERVED NO fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L 73 fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E CALORIE MENU LABELING ADMINISTRATION AND DOCUMENTATION SIGNAGE  Prepermit Serious PPS Violations that must be corrected before permit is issued  Public Health Hazards PHH must be corrected immediately 15S A flavored tobacco product sold or offered for sale in an establishment other than a tobacco bar. RESTRICTION ON THE SALE OF CERTAIN FLAVORED TOBACCO 15T Original label for tobacco product sold or offered for sale not maintained on site. 16A A food containing artificial trans fat, with 0.5 grams or more of trans fat per serving,
site. 16A A food containing artificial trans fat, with 0.5 grams or more of trans fat per serving, is being stored, distributed, held for service, used in preparation of a menu item, or served. 16B The original nutritional fact labels andor ingredient label for a cooking oil, shortening or margarine or food item sold in bulk, or acceptable manufacturers documentation not maintained on site. 16E Caloric content range minimum to maximum not posted on menus and or menu boards for each flavor, variety and size of each menu item that is offered for sale in different flavors, varieties and sizes. 16F Specific caloric content or range thereof not posted on menus, menu boards or food tags for each menu item offered as a combination meal with multiple options that are listed as single items. 18A Current valid permit, registration or other authorization to operate establishment not available. 18B Document issued by the Board of Health, Commissioner or Department unlawfully reproduced or
18B Document issued by the Board of Health, Commissioner or Department unlawfully reproduced or altered. NUISANCE AND OTHER MISCELLANEOUS 18C Notice of the Department of Board of Health mutilated, obstructed, or removed. 18D Failure to comply with an Order of the Board of Health, Commissioner, or Department. 18E Failure to report occurrences of suspected food borne illness to the Department. 18F Permit not conspicuously displayed. 18G Manufacture of frozen dessert not authorized on Food Service Establishment permit. 18H Failure of event sponsor to exclude vendor without a current valid permit or registration. 20A Food allergy information poster not conspicuously posted where food is being prepared or processed by food workers. 20B Food allergy information poster not posted in language understood by all food workers. 20E Letter Grade or Grade Pending card not conspicuously posted and visible to passersby. 22A Nuisance created or allowed to exist. Facility not free from unsafe,
and visible to passersby. 22A Nuisance created or allowed to exist. Facility not free from unsafe, hazardous, offensive or annoying conditions. 22B Toilet facility used by women does not have at least one covered garbage receptacle. 22C Bulb not shielded or shatterproof, in areas where there is extreme heat, temperature changes, or where accidental contact may occur. 22D ROP Processing equipment not approved by DOHMH. 20F Current letter grade card not posted. 20C Food allergy poster does not contain text provided or approved by Department. 20D Choking first aid poster not posted. Alcohol and pregnancy warning sign not posted. Resuscitation equipment exhaled air resuscitation masks adult  pediatric, latex gloves, sign not posted. Inspection report sign not posted. 16C Caloric content not posted on menus, menu boards or food tags, in a food service establishment that is 1 of 15 or more outlets operating the same type of business nationally under common ownership or control, or as a
outlets operating the same type of business nationally under common ownership or control, or as a franchise or doing business under the same name, for each menu item that is served in portions, the size and content of which are standardized. ARTIFICIAL TRANS FAT CONDITION YES OBSERVED NO Bureau of Food Safety and Community Sanitation Contact Information Phone 212 6761600 Fax 212 6761666 web www.nyc.govhealth Bill de Blasio Daniel Kass, M.S.P.H. Elliott S. Marcus Mayor Deputy Commissioner Associate Commissioner Division of Environmental Health Mary T. Bassett, M.D., M.P.H. Robert Edman Michelle Robinson Commissioner of Health Assistant Commissioner Deputy Executive Director and Mental Hygiene Program Planning and Policy 74 N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E A Sample SmokeFree Workplace Policy Purpose A smokefree policy has been developed to comply with the New York City Smoke Free Air Act Title 17, Chapter 5 of the Administrative Code
to comply with the New York City Smoke Free Air Act Title 17, Chapter 5 of the Administrative Code of the City of New York and New York State Clean Indoor Air Act Article 13E of the New York State Public Health Law, and to protect all employees and visitors from secondhand smoke, an established cause of cancer and respiratory disease. The policy set forth below is effective March 30, 2003 for all company name locations. SmokeFree All areas of the workplace are now smokefree without exception. Smoking is not Areas permitted anywhere in the workplace, including all indoor facilities and company vehicles with more than one person present. Smoking is not permitted in private enclosed offices, conference and meeting rooms, cafeterias, lunchrooms, or employee lounges. Sign No Smoking signs must be clearly posted at all entrances and on bulletin Requirements boards, bathrooms, stairwells and other prominent places. No ashtrays are permitted in any indoor area. Compliance Compliance with the
prominent places. No ashtrays are permitted in any indoor area. Compliance Compliance with the smokefree workplace policy is mandatory for all employees and persons visiting the company, with no exceptions. Employees who violate this policy are subject to disciplinary action. Any disputes involving smoking should be handled through the companys procedure for resolving other workrelated problems. If the problem persists, an employee can speak to company department and phone number for complaints or lodge an anonymous complaint by calling the New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygienes complaint line, 1877NYC DOH7 18776923647 or on the web at nyc.govhealth. DOHMHs enforcement staff will take appropriate action to resolve the problem. The law prohibits employers from retaliating against employees who invoke the law or who request managements assistance in implementing it in the workplace. Smoking Company name encourages all smoking employees to quit smoking. The Cessation
the workplace. Smoking Company name encourages all smoking employees to quit smoking. The Cessation company medical department or worksite wellness program offers a Opportunities number of services for employees who want to quit. Smoking cessation information is available from the New York Smokers Quit Line at 1866 NY QUITS 18666978487. Questions Any questions regarding the smokefree workplace policy should be directed to company department and phone number handling inquiries. NOTE This policy may need to be modified in workplaces and establishments that qualify for exemptions fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L 75 fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E Quiz No. 1 1. Potentially hazardous foods provide condi tions favorable for bacterial growth.  TRUE or  FALSE 2. Shellfish tags must be kept with the product and then filed away for days. 3. The acronym FIFO means  in,
tags must be kept with the product and then filed away for days. 3. The acronym FIFO means  in,  out. The first step is . 4. To show that it is wholesome, meat inspected by the U.S. Department of Agriculture will have the  USDA inspection stamp  USDA grade stamp 5. The temperature danger zone for food is between F and F. At this temperature range, harmful bacteria  reproduce  die rapidly 6. In a refrigerator, raw food products should be stored  above  below cooked foods This is to prevent  . 7. List three defects which will cause canned foods to be rejected  ,  ,  . 8. A glass thermometer should never be used for measuring food temperature. What kinds can be used 9. Fresh shell eggs must be stored in a refrigera tor at or below 45 F  TRUE or  FALSE 10. All food items must be stored at least  6 inches  8 inches off the floor  12 inches 11. Cold temperatures slow down the growth of bacteria.  TRUE or  FALSE 12. People, both food workers and customers, pose the greatest risk to food
TRUE or  FALSE 12. People, both food workers and customers, pose the greatest risk to food safety.  TRUE or  FALSE FOOD PROTECTION COURSE 76 N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E Quiz No. 2 1. Under favorable growth conditions, bacteria will double every  to minutes. 2. List three situations when hands must be washed thoroughly a.  b.  c.  3. All food service establishments must have handwash sinks within each  and each  and they must be provided with  and  running water, soap, and individual disposable towels or a hot air dryer. 4. Employees with an illness that can be trans mitted by direct contact with food or through food must be . 5. Bacteria commonly found on the surface of raw chicken are called  Salmonella  Staphylococcus  B. Cereus 6. A piece of metal in a food item is an example of a  physical  chemical hazard 7. Clostridium perfringens is associated with foods in deep pots. We can control it by  and  meat dishes rapidly. 8.
is associated with foods in deep pots. We can control it by  and  meat dishes rapidly. 8. Home canned foods cannot be used in a food establishment because of the fear of  AIDS or  Botulism 9. Smoked fish must be stored at or below 38F. This is to control the growth of the microorganism . 10. The disease  is commonly associated with undercooked pork. Pork should therefore be cooked to a minimum tempera ture of F. 11. When using raw shell eggs in a food that will not be cooked or will only be cooked lightly, we should use  eggs instead. 12. Foods contaminated by harmful microorgan isms always have a changed appearance.  TRUE or  FALSE FOOD PROTECTION COURSE fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L 77 fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E Quiz No. 3 1. The proper safe holding temperature for potentially hazardous foods is at  or below for cold foods and at  or above for hot
temperature for potentially hazardous foods is at  or below for cold foods and at  or above for hot foods. 2. When cooling hot foods in a refrigerator, they must be covered  after being cooled  when first placed in the refrigerator 3. Refrigerated foods that will be served hot must be rapidly reheated to 165 F using  a hot holding unit  a stove or an oven 4. When bacteria from a raw food get into a cooked or readytoeat food, this is called   . 5. The correct cooking temperature for poultry, stuffed meat and stuffing is F. 6. Thick foods cool faster in  small amounts and small containers  large amounts and large containers. 7. It is good practice to make cold salads with ingredients that were previously chilled  TRUE or  FALSE 8. On a buffet table, maintaining proper food temperature is equally as important as having a prop er sneeze guard.  TRUE or  FALSE 9. An air break is necessary in the waste line of the  potwash and handwash sinks  potwash and culinary sinks 10. It is a good
in the waste line of the  potwash and handwash sinks  potwash and culinary sinks 10. It is a good practice to thaw frozen foods by leaving them out on the kitchen counter overnight.  TRUE or  FALSE 11. When handling foods that have already been cooked and are ready to be eaten we must use  ,  ,  . 12. To ensure that any food contact surface is safe to use, it must be washed, rinsed and  , FOOD PROTECTION COURSE 78 N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E Quiz No. 4 1. SelfAssessment of food operations is an excel lent way to improve security, safety and general work practice.  TRUE or  FALSE 2. List three common injuries among restaurant workers.  ,  ,  . 3. What causes muscle strains and sprains among restaurant workers 4. Suitable work shoes are check all that apply  slip resistant  leather soled  canvas sneakers  flats 5. Who should be given access to facility food areas check all that apply  cooks  customers  contractors 6. Store knives
access to facility food areas check all that apply  cooks  customers  contractors 6. Store knives in  to prevent accidental cuts. 7. It is acceptable to use pesticides in food establishments by food workers as long as label directions are followed.  TRUE or  FALSE 8. The three key strategies of integrated pest management are to starve them, build them out, and destroy them.  TRUE or  FALSE 9. Trans fat in foods raises HDL, increasing the risk of heart disease.  TRUE or  FALSE 10. List four foods that contain trans fats.  ,  ,  ,  . FOOD PROTECTION COURSE fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L 79 fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E Numbers to remember 158F  41F  41F140F  0F  0F220F  38F  6 inches  90 days  140F  165F  2030 minutes  145F  150F  130F for 112 minutes  4 hours  6 lbs.  more than 19 seats  4 inches  170F for 30 sec.  50 ppm  1 oz.1gal.  31F15 Hours  FOOD
6 lbs.  more than 19 seats  4 inches  170F for 30 sec.  50 ppm  1 oz.1gal.  31F15 Hours  FOOD PROTECTION COURSE 80 N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E Co al I i i M i eheat R iki S d T Co al tern n I m u m im ni M g ni eheat R g, nin ki o to S d an res u perat em Te ge ra to fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L 81 fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E Health Department Amends Temperature Control Requirements Monitor Food by Using Time as a Public Health Control                                                                                 Which foods can be monitored by time alone                                                                    ,         Which food service establishments can use time alone as the public health control                                  .            At what temperature should hot or cold
health control                                  .            At what temperature should hot or cold food be when I start monitoring it 0        1234.534      214.64  How long can I keep food from hot or cold holding            7         7                    82 N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E How do I track food by time                  8                                    9                                            Sample Tracking Label FourHour Time Limit for Hot and Cold Food What foods can I hold out of temperature longer than four hours 7                 8                                                                                 Sample Tracking Label SixHour Time Limit for Cold Food Only What should I do with food not served within the four or sixhour time limit 7                   34.  333      Date January 1, 2012 Food item Peking Duck Holding temperature of food item 155 F Time removed 1130 AM Discard time 330 PM Date
Peking Duck Holding temperature of food item 155 F Time removed 1130 AM Discard time 330 PM Date January 1, 2012 Food item Sushi rice and raw fish Holding temperature of food item 38 F Time removed 1130AM Temperature at four hours 59 F at 330 PM Discard time 530 PM fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L 83 fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E TAKING TEMPERATURES Use a bimetallic stem thermometer, digital thermometer thermistor or thermocouple unit to monitor temperatures of potentially hazardous foods. Clean and sanitize the thermometer probe with a singleuse alcohol wipe or other approved sanitizer. Insert the probe into the center, or thickest part of the food between the folds of flexible packaged products, or between packages of food. Do not puncture the packaging i. Bimetallic stem thermometer must be inserted in the food up to the dimple in the stem. ii. For
i. Bimetallic stem thermometer must be inserted in the food up to the dimple in the stem. ii. For thermistor thermometers, 34 inch of the stem must be in the food. iii. Thermocouple registers temperature at the tip of the probe. Step 3. Wait for the reading to register l 1520 seconds for bimetallic stem thermometer and digital readout l Few seconds for thermocouple Step 4. Sanitize and store thermometers safely for future use 84 N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E Receiving Potentially Hazardous Foods PHF l Inspect the delivery truck for proper temperatures, cleanliness and hygienic practices. l Make sure by that all PHFs are delivered at proper temperatures 41 F for cold food except smoked fish at 38 F and raw shell eggs at 45 F 0 F or below for frozen foods 140 F or higher for hot food. l Make sure all frozen foods are frozen solid at 0 F or below. l When receiving shellfish, ensure that proper tags are provided. Receiving dry foods,
F or below. l When receiving shellfish, ensure that proper tags are provided. Receiving dry foods, produce and packaged foods l Ensure that all packages are intact and free of damage. l Check for rodent gnawing andor presence of insects or insect eggs. l Ensure that products are delivered long before their Sell by or Use by date. l Look out for any dented, leaking, rusted or swollen cans. l Ensure that fruits and vegetables are not bruised, wilted or spoiled. RECEIVING fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L 85 fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E l Implement First In  First Out FIFO practices by dating the food products as they are received. This enables easier stock rotation while minimizing food waste. l All food areas must be constructed away from overhead waste or condensation lines. l All food must be stored at least six inches above the floor, so that proper
condensation lines. l All food must be stored at least six inches above the floor, so that proper cleaning can take place. Foods must also be stored away from the walls and ceilings to allow for proper air circulation. Dry Storage l Humidity of 50 and a temperature of 70 F are strongly recommended. l Look out for signs of vermin activity, such as rat or mouse droppings, vermin eggs or odors. l Store food in verminproof containers  metal or glass containers, with tightly fitted lids. l Remove dented, leaking, rusted, swollen or unlabeled canned goods. Cold Storage l All PHFs must be stored at 41 F Except smoked fish at 38 F and raw shell eggs at 45  F. l All cooked and readytoeat food must be stored away from and above raw food. l Do not store foods in quantities that exceed the storage units capacity. l Place a refrigeration thermometer in the warmest spot in the unit to measure ambient air temperature of the unit l Check for condensation that may contaminate food. l Keep frozen foods
air temperature of the unit l Check for condensation that may contaminate food. l Keep frozen foods frozen at 0 F or lower. STORAGE 86 N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E Cooking Temperatures Cook food to the following minimum internal temperatures l Poultry, stuffed meats, stuffing 165 F l Ground meats 158 F l Pork and Pork Products 150 F l Shell eggs 145 F l All other meats lamb, fish, shellfish etc. 140 F Important things to remember l When checking internal product temperature, measure at various locations, especially the thickest part e.g.,. the meats around the thigh bones. l Always use clean and sanitary thermometers to check temperatures. l Properly maintain cooking equipment ovens, stoves, grills, salamanders, etc.. l Keep equipment clean and perform regular checks to ensure satisfactory performance. COOKING fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L 1 87 fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L N E W Y O
O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L 1 87 fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E Step 1 Cool foods from 140F to 70F within two hours. Step 2 Cool foods from 70F to 41F within four additional hours. Recommended Cooling Methods Meat roasts, Poultry and Fish l Reduce the size. Cut into 6 lbs. or less portions. Liquid foods  Soups, gravies, curries, sauces, etc. l Use a 4 inch shallow pan with the product depth of no more than 2 inches. l Place the pan in the refrigerator uncovered best place is where the cold air can blow across it. l Stirring helps release the trapped heat. l Use thermometer to check the temperature and cover after it has been cooled. Ice Water Bath l Place the pot of food in a larger container or a culinary sink with water and ice a 5050 ice to water ratio would be best. l Use ice paddles to cool food from within use it to stir the food. Ice as an Ingredient l Prepare food
ice paddles to cool food from within use it to stir the food. Ice as an Ingredient l Prepare food with half the amount of water the recipe requires and use the other half in the form of ice to be added during the cooling process. COOLING 88 N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E Acceptable methods to thaw frozen foods l There are four acceptable ways to thaw frozen food 1. In a refrigeration unit at 41 F or lower 2. Under cold 70 F or lower running water 3. In a microwave oven, when it is followed by a continuous cooking process 4. As part of a cooking process for single portions. Things to remember l Never refreeze thawed food. l Never thaw frozen food at room temperature. l Thaw raw food below cooked food to avoid crosscontamination. PROPER THAWING DEFROST fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L 89 fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y
A I N I N G M A N U A L N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E What is cross contamination This is a term typically used for any situation where harmful microorganisms transfer from a raw or contaminated food to a cooked or readytoeat food. Cutting boards and prep tables l Wash, rinse, and sanitize when changing from raw to readytoeat RTE food, and in between preparing different types of raw meat, fish, and poultry. Hands l When handling readytoeat RTE food, prevent bare hands contact with the use of gloves, tongs, spatula, deli paper, spoon, fork, etc. l Wash hands thoroughly and often and always between tasks. Food Storage l Store raw meat, fish, and poultry below readytoeat RTE. l Store raw meats in the following order from bottom to top i. Poultry ii. Ground meats iii. Pork iv. All other meats Its best to keep all seafood separate from other meats. l Keep food that does not require further washing or cooking separate from food that
other meats. l Keep food that does not require further washing or cooking separate from food that does. CROSSCONTAMINATION 90 N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E The use of gloves is never a replacement for good hand washing practices Before putting on gloves l Wash hands thoroughly. l Dry hands using a disposable paper towel. l Put gloves on when you are ready to handle readytoeat RTE foods. l Use gloves for only one task, and then discard. l If an interruption occurs during food preparation, remove gloves and discard. l Use clean gloves when you resume food preparation, but remember to wash hands first. l Gloves are prone to contamination and should be discarded when soiled or damaged. l Fabric or reusable gloves may not be used with readytoeat RTE food. PROPER USE OF GLOVES fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L 91 fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L
R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E l Keep all foods at 140F or higher. l Preheat equipment before adding food. l Check food temperatures with an accurate food thermometer. l Record temperatures. l Stir frequently to evenly distribute the temperature throughout the food. HOT HOLDING FOODS 92 N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E Manual dishwashing l The dishwashing area must be located a sufficient distance away from food preparation areas to avoid possible crosscontamination. l Manual dishwashing is allowed only in a threecompartment sink Wash in the first Rinse in the second Sanitize in the third then air dry. l For heat sanitizing, water temperature in the third compartment must be at least 170 F or higher, and the dishes must be immersed for at least 30 seconds. The temperature must be maintained by a heating element. l For chemical
for at least 30 seconds. The temperature must be maintained by a heating element. l For chemical sanitizing, the chlorinebased sanitizer in the third com partment must be at least 50 parts per million ppm, and the dishes must be immersed in the sanitizing solution for at least 60 seconds. To make 50 ppm sanitizing solution, take ounce or one tablespoon of household bleach and mix it with one gallon of water. l Appropriate test kit must be used to test the strength of sanitizers used. Mechanical dishwashing l All mechanical dishwashers, both high temperature and lowtempera ture must be operated as per manufacturer suggestions. Final rinse temperature of mechanical hightemperature dishwasher must be at least 180 F or higher. l Properly calibrated dishwashersafe thermometers must be used to verify final rinse temperatures. l Appropriate test kit must be used to verify proper chemical concentrations. CLEANING AND SANITIZING fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L 93 fo d P R
CLEANING AND SANITIZING fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L 93 fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E l Premises, equipment, and fixtures must be constructed and designed to be vermin proof. l All food must be stored in verminproof containers with tightly fitted lids. l Establishment must be free of all holes, cracks, and crevices. l A licensed exterminator must perform any extermination done on the premises. l Eliminate all holes, cracks, and crevices in food storage, preparation, and handling areas. l Make all parts of food storage, preparation, and handling areas easily accessible for routine cleaning. l Ensure that all doors and windows are tight fitting, with metal kick plates wherever necessary. l Ensure that screens are provided on all windows and doors that can be opened. l Food storage, preparation, and handling areas should be vermin proof. Be aware that mice
opened. l Food storage, preparation, and handling areas should be vermin proof. Be aware that mice can enter openings less than inch in diameter, and rats can enter openings less than inch in diameter. l Clean up all debris and trash. Remove food waste and other garbage frequently. l Place the garbage in metal containers with tight fitted lids. l Keep outside areas of the FSE clean to discourage pests. Maintain proper drainage to reduce or eliminate shelter areas for pests. l To reduce pest and vermin harborage, control weeds under fences and other barriers with herbicides labeled for this purpose. l Place outdoor lighting fixtures away from entrances and windows to the FSE to minimize the presence of flying insects that are attracted to light. PEST CONTROL 94 N E W Y O R K C I T Y D E P A R T M E N T O F H E A L T H  M E N T A L H Y G I E N E  Date Product Time Temp F Corrective Action  TEMPERATURE LOG fo d P R O T E C T I O N T R A I N I N G M A N U A L
